 17K002 School Name: PARKSIDE PREPARATORY ACADEMY Principal: ADRIENNE SPENCER   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Parkside Preparatory Academy 17K002 331700010002 6-8 School Number (DBN): 655 Parkside Avenue, Brooklyn NY 11226 718-462-6992 Phone Number: 718-284-7717 Fax: Adrienne Spencer aspence1@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Adrienne Spencer Arthur Slifkin Giselle Williams-Thomas Adrienne Spencer TBA N/A TBA District Information Geographical District: 17 Clarence G. Ellis Superintendent: 1224 Park Place Room 130, Brooklyn NY 11213 Superintendent’s Office Address: cellis3@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-221-4372 Phone Number: FSC: South 718-221-4326 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: Mauricciere De Govia   Executive Director’s Office Address: 415-89 th Street, Rm. 409 Brooklyn NY 11209 cwatson21@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-759-5131 Phone Number: 718-630-1634 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Adrienne Spencer Arthur Slifkin Giselle Williams-Thomas Jawara Hudson TBA N/A N/A DoniqueBurke Linor Castro NadgerHenry NatachaDaring Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Member/DC 37 Member/ CSA Member/UFT Member/Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Roslyn Tenpow Angelina Stevenson Theresa Wolsely Chandra Moe Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission : It is our goal to ensure that all students achieve success in our collaborative, caring, safe and structured environment. Utilizing a standards-based curriculum, culturally-responsive, student-centered teaching, appropriate use of technology, college and career exploration and providing continuous assessment and feedback towards the development of students' intellectual, emotional and social skills, our students will be prepared for college, career and a future as productive adults.   Core Values: Honesty, integrity, respect, trust, accountability, compassion, collaboration, courage and reflection. Vision: Parkside Preparatory Academy is committed to developing and maintaining a safe, nurturing, mutually respectful, collaborative culture that promotes excellence and high expectations and where everyone feels supported by a caring community. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Parkside Preparatory Academy @ MS 2 is located in Flatbush, Brooklyn and is home to approximately 500 students of diverse ethnic backgrounds - 82% Black, 12% Hispanics, 2% White and 3% Asian. Our school accommodates students in grades 6 to 8 and they hail mostly from the United States of America, the Caribbean, Africa and the Mid-East. We presently have 55% Males and 45% Females. Special Needs students including Special Education students and English Language Learners account for 20% and 9% respectively of the population. Parkside Preparatory Academy is constantly in pursuit of academic and social excellence. As a school community, we work together to provide an educational program that will meet the demands of the 21st Century workforce. Our students are exposed to authentic learning experiences outside of the classroom where they get an opportunity to showcase their work to the school community, at expose, fairs and institutions of higher learning and corporations including colleges, Google. To accomplish these ideals and the vision and mission of our school, Parkside Preparatory Academy works strategically with a number of educational partners and institutions. Our 2018 - 2019 external partners will include Medgar Evers College which provides enrichment and professional development programs for students, teachers and parents. We also collaborate with State University of NY Downstate for cultural and academic "STEMS" programs. Another strong affiliate is the Urban Advantage Science program which promotes professional development opportunities for staff and parents and educational trips for students to further their understanding of scientific inquiry through collaboration with urban institutions. The parent involvement component in the Urban Advantage Program also provides trips to institutions of learning for parents on weekends. STEMS training for teachers is also provided. Each teacher receives a $500 stipend to support their teaching/learning experiences in their classrooms. The Beacon Program, in partnership with Medgar Evers College, provides tutoring, recreational and experiential learning. The Holland Opus Foundation also provides musical instruments for our school band. For social/emotional development schoolwide, we will continue our efforts through NYC DOE's Safe and Supportive Opportunity Program Extended (SSOPE) program to teach emotional intelligence, restorative practices, peer mediation, classroom engagement, counseling services, social emotional skills, progressive discipline supports, therapeutic crisis training and internal coaching. Liberty Arts and Sports provides academic programs, recreation and training for specialized high school. We are partnering with Teaching Matters to provide supports for staff to increase their proficiency in teaching. To extend the range of experiences for our students, we will continue to work with NYC Young People's Chorus, biking with Bike NY, the Arts Continuum Program, a collaboration between 17K002 and 17K092 as partners to bring dancing and drumming to the student population. The Scientist in Residence program will work with special needs students. NYU Tandon School of Engineering will support students in STEMS activities. We will partner with Brooklyn Botanic Gardens, Project Green Reach partnership for inquiry-based science lessons and GrowNYC for establishing and maintaining a garden. 0  NYC Champs program will provide fall, winter and spring physical education afterschool programs. RESO A and capital will allow for increased STEMs and educational supports for students and staff. We have conditionally received close over four hundred and fifty thousand dollars for the 2018-2019 school year. Support for our teachers include mentoring for new teachers, consultants from Teaching Matters to coach staff in ELA and Math, internal and external professional development, teacher team support, critical friends networks, coaching and inter and intra-visitation. Frequent observation and feedback is also provided to increase teacher practice and performance. Our parents benefit from a umber of parental engagement activities. They range from workshops to trips to cultural institutions, monthly engagement meetings, classroom visits and parent, staff and student competitions. Classes are provided in basic education - Math, literacy and English as a New Language. High School Regents level courses are offered in Math, Science and U.S. History and Government in accelerated classes and the Spanish proficiency exam. Our school building is 24 years old and is a beautifully kept building that provides an attractive, welcoming and appealing environment. Our school is also home to a District 75 program, P141K and a Charter school, Explore. Our goal of having a school that serves all of its students by providing a quality education is being realized every day at Parkside Preparatory Academy. We continue to extend our vision of high expectations, staff and student agency, a professional learning community and collective accountability from all constituents. We know all of our students can learn when given the proper resources and support and we have very high expectations for them to achieve to the highest levels. Parkside Prep is proud of the direction in which the school is headed. Best practices include end-of-year expositions and symposiums. Proudly displayed around the school are students’ work in the Visual Arts, Culinary Arts, Science Expo, Music, Chorus, Dance recitals, Physical Education Sports Day, College and Career Expos and STEMS symposiums. Teachers also have a best practice share and have developed a professional learning community that supports pedagogical growth. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Data shows that our female students are outperforming our male students. In 2018-2019 we will continue to focus on ELA and Math proficiency for an all-male class focusing on strategies for improving male achievement. In our school, there are 95 students with IEPs. This accounts for 20% of our population. Similarly, there are 56 ELLs students and they account for 8.5% of the population. These students will receive related services, counseling, Speech, SETTS and additional academic intervention to support and promote achievement. Our subgroup of ELLs is made up of students speaking 5 different languages: Spanish, French, Haitian-Creole, Yoruba and Arabic. Approximately 25% of the ELLs population reach proficiency level each year. However, there are several who continue to be long-term ELLs demanding supports to meet proficiency. This school year, we have 15 long-term ELLs. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 1  Data Source - 2018 NYSED and ATS In October of 2017, real-time data gleaned from ATS showed that there were 17.44% of “All” students proficient in NYS performance test in Mathematics. Recent reports from the NYSED 2018 results showed an increase to 22%. This is an increase of 4.5% for the year for all student population. Similarly for ELA, real-time data gleaned from ATS showed that there were 23.33% of “all” students proficient in ELA. Recent reports from the NYSED indicates an increase to 44.7% proficiency across “All Grades”. This is an increase of 21.37% for the year for “All Students” population. Year-to-Year Comparisons - 2018 NYSED Account Report Subject ELA Math 2017 33.3 18.5 2018 44.7 22.0 Year-to-Year Comparisons – Real-Time Data 10/31/17 - 6/26/18 - ATS Subject ELA Math Oct 2017 23.33 17.44 June 2018 44.7 22.0 Change + 11.40 +2.0 Change +21.37 +4.56 Regardless of the data source, student achievement on these common core assessments showed an increase in student performance over the course of one year. Quality Guide Snapshot 2017-2018 The School Quality Guide for 2017-2018 shows a rating of 4.43 out of 4.99 for the area of Effective School Leadership. This is an improvement of 0.20 over the 2016-2017 scores of 4.23. The score for 2017-2018 of 3.76 shows an increase in the level of Trust of 0.11 over the 2016-2017 score of 3.65. These areas may be viewed as areas of greater strength. Negligible increases were identified in the element of Collaborative Teachers which shows an increase of 0.08 from 2016-217 to 2017-2018. Likewise Strong Family Ties increased from 3.75 in 2016-2017 to 3.77 in 2017-2018. An area in need of improvement even though the performance ratings have decreased slightly in the Framework element from 3.67 in 2017 to 3.63 in 2018 was Rigorous Instruction. In the survey, however, the qualitative score was a decrease from 4.16 to 4.03 from 2016-2017 to 2017-2018. Another area identified for improvement is Supportive Environment which decreased from 4.26 in 2016-2017 to 3.75 in 2018 in the Learning Survey element scores. The school’s priority needs that will be addressed in the 2018-2019 year will be Supportive Environment and a continued focus on improving Rigorous Instruction. 2  3  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 17K002 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 493 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 42 41 10 7 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 47 42 11 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 89.0% % Attendance Rate 85.4% % Reduced Lunch 10.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.6% 13.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 15.75 0% 15% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 44.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A YSH YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 27 27 94.3% 4.7% 16.6% 78.1% 3.9% 2.2% 4 42% 6.7 22.0% 37% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A YSH YES NO N/A N/A NO NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. For the 2017-2018 school year, NYSED data indicate an increase in ELA proficiency schoolwide of 12%. This is an increase from 33% in 2016-2017 to 45% in 2017-2018. Likewise, the Math proficiency schoolwide data shows an increase from 19% to 22%. This represents a 3% increase from 2017 to 2018. Female students showed an increase in ELA proficiency from 41% i 2017 to 55% in 2018, an increase of 14% overall. Male students increased from 25% proficiency in ELA to 34%, an increase of 9% overall. In Mathematics, we recognized a 3% increase in both female and male performance. Females increased from 24% in 2017 to 27% in 2018. Similarly, male students improved form 14% in 2017 to 17% in 2018. Special Populations ELLs students declined in Mathematics proficiency moving from 4% to 2%, a decrease in the number of 1 student. In ELA, on the other hand, we witnessed a decrease in proficiency from 9% to 2%, from 11 students to 6 students. In 2017 to 2018, a decrease of 7% overall. Special Education students also demonstrated a 7% decrease in performance in ELA from 15% in 2017 to 8% in 2018, a decrease from 11 students to 6 students. In Mathematics, there was no decrease in this subgroup from 2017 to 2018. This subgroup remained at 1%. The priority needs that will be addressed for Rigorous Instruction are: Improvement of Mathematics instruction - Strengthening comprehension, problem-solving, tier 1 intervention and vocabulary development Focus on ELLs and Special Needs instruction - Differentiated instruction Identification of research-based strategies that address the male population. . 5  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all subject area teachers will create visible learning environments which will raise intellectual activity, collaboration and critical thinking skills as measured by lesson plans, classroom observations and student engagement. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ACTIVITIES/STRATEGIES TO CREATE VISIBLE LEARNING ENVIRONMENTS FOR ALL STUDENTS INCLUDING ELLS AND SWDS.  Learning targets will be explicitly discussed and developed with students. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? September 2018 - June 2019 BFSC personnel, school leaders, consultants, lead teachers Teachers Sept 2018 - June 2019  Teachers will make the criteria for achieving success Students, clear to students.  Teachers will use effective questioning techniques to promote clarity and to check for meaning, understanding and to probe for evidence-based responses. Students are encourage to share what they are learning and how they will learn it.   Teachers will develop collaborative activities and help  students to define roles and to use discussion protocols. Students will build "agency" through self-monitoring activities using rubrics, checklists, peer review, peer check, reflective activities, think-pair-share, turn-and-talk etc.  Teachers will utilize anchor charts, exemplars and rubrics Teachers Teachers to guide performance and evaluate learning.  Teachers will create active learning activities that are Students clear, purposeful and linked to real life application and inquiry.   Teachers will use knowledge of students learning styles, needs, interests, abilities and formative assessments to craft "intentional" lesson plans. Focus on developing and deepening their critical thinking skills such as supporting arguments with text evidence, discerning author's purpose, justifying solutions, questioning the text. Select resources and materials that are interesting, engaging and age and gender appropriate.   Utilize Webb's DOK questioning bank to promote high-level questions.  Teachers will create participation kits with tools to facilitate active lesson involvement. Teachers Students Teachers Sept 2018 - June 2019 Teachers Sept 2018 - June 2019 Teachers Sept 2018 - June 2019 Teachers Sept 2018 - June 2019 Teacher Teams Sept 2018 - June 2019 Teachers Sept 2018 - June 2019 Sept 2018 - June 2019 Teachers Sept 2018 - June 2019 7  o Cycles of observations with timely feedback, Teachers learning walks, teacher team meetings will provide oversight of the action plan. PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT  The school will uniformly develop a definition or expectation for visible learning environment.  Professional development activities will include the discussion of specific strategies for raising classroom discourse, explore and include the CCLS rubric for speaking and listening.  Exploring questioning techniques that reinforce and promote high level thinking, clarification  Adapt and/or create protocols, rubrics, checklists for discussion and assessment.  Teachers will participate in intra-visitation and inter-visitation followed by reflective practice.  Analyzing students' work and data to inform teaching and learning.  Teachers will engage in best-practice share.  PPA will continue to provide professional development utilizing our administrative staff, coordinators, lead teachers; instructional videos from sites such as EngageNY, Webinars and opportunities provided by the BFSC.  PPA will continue to utilize common core aligned curricula for all subject areas including Expeditionary Learning for ELA, Engage NY for Mathematics; supplementary programs including NY Ready and Go Math; Performance Series, Read 180, IXL, Fastt Math; computer lab and a well-equipped school library/media center.  Continue to train teachers in strategies for scaffolding instruction and creating assessments Students Students, Teachers Teachers Teachers Teachers Sept 2018 - June 2019 Teachers Teachers Sept 2018 - June 2019 Sept 2018 - June 2019 Students Teachers Sept 2018 - June 2019 Teachers Teachers Sept 2018 - June 2019 Teachers Sept 2018 - June 2019 Sept 2018 - June 2019 Sept 2018 - June 2019 Teachers Teachers Teachers  Continue to examine learning tasks, assessments and standards and make modifications and adaptations  Consider an individual learning plan for ENL students and Teachers, Students ensure a quality IEP development and implementation for SWDs.  Examine how culture impacts learning for these groups  Ensure an environment of equity and access for these Teachers learners - parallel programming, identification for acceleration, inclusivity.  Provide behavioral supports ie BIPs, FBAs, PBIS.  Professional development for all personnel.  Promote family involvement activities and workshops. Teachers Sept 2018 - June 2019 8  Teachers Sept 2018 - June 2019 Teacher Teams Teachers Teachers Teachers Teachers Teachers Teachers, students Teachers Teacher Teams Teachers Teacher Teams Teachers Parents Sept 2018 - June 2019 Sept 2018 - June 2019 Teachers Sept 2018 - June 2019 Sept 2018 - June 2019 Teachers Teachers Teachers 9  Parent Coordinator, Administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  Families will be made aware of what students are learning through units of studies, through learning maps, bulletins - Curriculum Night, Open School, Tuesday/Thursday engagement opportunities.  Parents will be trained in how to use rubrics and checklists to help students at home in mastering their work.  Parents will be taught strategies for deepening discussion. For example, "Prove it", "Explain how", "Give an example", "Give evidence from the text to support..".  Parents will ask students at home to articulate their daily learnings.  Parents will engage students in daily reading and timely completion of homework and projects.  The key person responsible for oversight is the parent coordinator.  Timeline - September 2018 - June 2019. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. TL FSF, and TI funds form the basis of our budgetary program and is used to support our school program. We have also received Vision for School Improvement funds to assist with maintaining our programs. 0  Funds will be set aside for teacher per session and per diem and supervisor per session. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 1, 2019, all teachers will raise their proficiency by at least one level in Danielson's Framework, Component 3c - Engagement. Additionally, by November 1, 2018, observations and learning walks will assess the creation of visible learning tasks and standard maps of curriculum units. Daily observations will be conducted to monitor for student engagement, rigor and planning. Initial, mid-year and end-of-year meetings will be conducted with all teachers. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Interim progress checks on the development of visible learning tasks will be assessed using Danielson rubric. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strengths The 2017-2018 NYC School Survey showed that with regards to Safety:  95% of students say that they feel safe in their classes  93% of students say that they feel safe traveling between home and their school  91% of students feel safe in the hallways, bathrooms, locker rooms and cafeteria  85% of students say that they feel safe outside around their school  83% of students say that discipline is applied fairly in their school. Social-Emotional  81% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the adults at their school help students develop the skills they need to complete challenging coursework despite obstacles  78% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the adults at their school tell their students they believe they can achieve high academic standards  81% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the adults at their school teach critical thinking skills to students.  79% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the adults at their school have access to school based supports to assist in behavioral/emotional escalations. Needs The 2017-2018 NYC School Survey shows a need for improvement in Classroom behavior and Social-Emotional supports. There was only a 61% positive response for Classroom Behavior and a score of 2.17 out of 4.99 for Social-Emotional.  62% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the adults at their school recognize disruptive behavior as social-emotional learning opportunities.  68% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the adults at their school teach students the skills they need to regulate their behavior (i.e. by focusing their attention, controlling their emotions, or managing their thinking, behavior, and feelings.  59% of teachers say that adults at their school teach students how to advocate for themselves.  Teachers and students need to continue to work on social-emotional behaviors. 2  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, Parkside Preparatory Academy staff and school leadership will expand initiatives that strengthen our school's capacity and competencies in social, emotional, academic learning and leadership, promoting agency, student engagement and culturally-responsive classrooms as measured by a 20% increase in satisfaction on the Learning Survey and a 10% reduction in suspension rates. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The school will continue to hire a Restorative Justice Coordinator, a Restorative Justice Social Worker, train the staff in Restorative Circles and Peer Mediation, Social/Emotional Learning, use The Building and Belonging Curriculum (Grades 6-12). Train paraprofessionals in understanding students' social and emotional development. Ensure that teachers Implement the FBA/BIPs with fidelity for students with disabilities. Review the Chancellor's Discipline Code in Spanish, Arabic and French/Creole for ENL students. Use the NYC Respect for All campaign and brochures to promote tolerance, acceptance and respect for all communities including LGBTQ. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students September 2018 - June 2019 School Leadership Team, TAC-D Team, SSOPE Team, School administration, PPC Team, Translation Team. Oversight of the initiatives will include periodic data analysis, cycles of observation, learning walks, weekly meetings etc. Use Danielson’s Framework for Teaching 2a and 2d as a benchmark for creating an environment of respect, rapport and safety. All Teachers and students The school will continue to provide youth development courses in health, conflict mediation, advisories, home and careers and guidance sessions to teach respect for all. All staff and students September 2018 – June 2019 September 2018 – June 2019 School Administration Administration and staff PPA will teach digital citizenship and cyber-bullying. 4 Staff will continued to be trained in social-emotional teaching and learning to include de-escalation strategies, restorative practices and emotional intelligence. Monthly grade assemblies will be held to ensure that the mission is shared by all. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parkside Preparatory Academy will embark on a series of workshops sharing the vision and mission we have for a safe and supportive environment: how to mediate conflicts, creating a harmonious environment and building social-emotional competencies. The school will continue to communicate with parents through the SLT, PTA, monthly calendars published by the Parent Coordinator, the PPA App, Pupil Path/Skedula, monthly Principal's reports, frequent Facebook posts, emails, flyers and School Messenger auto-dial. The timeline is September 2018-June 2019 and responsible personnel will be the Parent Groups, Parent Coordinator, staff and administration. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources that will be leveraged to achieve this goal include professional development by administration, staff, lead teachers, parent leaders, including the Parent Coordinator, and outside resource personnel. Instructional resources include the use of programs such as Overcoming Obstacles, PBIS, Life Skills Training and Home and Career training. TL FSF, and TI funds form the basis of our budgetary program and is used to support our school program. We have also received Strong Schools, Strong Communities funds and Vision for School Improvement funds to assist with maintaining our programs. Funds will be set aside for teacher per session and per diem and supervisor per session. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 5  October 31, 2018, December 20, 2018, February 15, 2019, April 15, 2019, June 15, 2019 Parkside Preparatory Academy will utilize a variety of reports including the OORS report, referrals, the Learning Survey and a Satisfaction Survey to measure progress towards meeting this goal on the dates above. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure will include a study of the OSYD data in particular referral and suspension data and data from the Learning Survey to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths The 2017-18 NYC School Survey showed that:  100% of teachers say that they design instructional programs (for example, lessons and units) together  100% of teachers say that at their school teachers make a conscious effort to coordinate their teaching with instruction at other grade levels.  100% of teachers say that at their school the principal, teachers, and staff collaborate to make the school run effectively.  100% of teachers say that they talk with one another about instruction. Needs Data from classroom observations and teacher team meeting notes reveal that teacher teams must continue to create tools that strengthen students' abilities to self-monitor progress including standards maps, rubrics, checklists. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teacher teams will adapt or create standards maps, exemplars, success criteria, rubrics and checklists for units of study to assist students in self-monitoring their progress in learning as measured by observation data and the creation of these artifacts. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will create standards maps of units to provide a holistic approach outlining the skills that learners will need. Teachers September 2018 Teacher teams will create rigorous, authentic learning tasks that are reflective of real-life and student interests. Teachers September/October 2018 - June 2019 Administrators, Lead Teachers ELA, Math and Cross-curricular teacher teams Teachers and students will write goals, reflect on their goals and rewrite if needed. Teachers, Students September/October 2018 - June 2019 Administrators, Lead Teachers including ELLs SWDs Students including ELLs SWDs Students including ELLs SWDs Teachers October 2018 - June 2019 September 2018- June 2019 September 2018- June 2019 Administrators, Lead Teachers, Teachers, Administrators, Lead Teachers, Teachers Administrators, Lead Teachers, Teachers Teachers will create learning tasks that address the learning styles of students and incorporting choice and student interest. Student will engage in self-evaluation to include self-assessment, peer- assessment, peer review, success criteria, utilizing such tools as rubrics, checklists, exemplars. Professional development will include creation of rich tasks, success criteria, standards maps, collaborative teams identifying problems of practice and implementing plans of action to address gaps and sharing successes and failures schoolwide. Aligning practice with Danielson's Framework. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. PPA will continue to involve, educate and engage families through our continued use of our Parent App, communications through Pupilpath, monthly calendars, weekly open house, report cards, monthly parent meetings, conferences based on need. The key personnel responsible are teachers, administrators, parent coordinator, other support staff. 8  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources that will be leveraged to achieve this goal include professional development by administration, staff, other resource personnel. TLFSF and TI funds form the basis of our budgetary program and is used to support our school program. We have also received Vision for School Improvement funds to assist with maintaining our programs. Funds will be set aside for teacher per session and per diem and supervisor per session. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress monitoring will be conducted through daily and weekly observations of teachers. By February 15 2019, the Advance MOTP will be used as a quantifiable mid-point benchmark. Instrument of measure will be observation reports, lesson plans and advance data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Observation reports. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths NYC School Survey gave the highest rating, 4.43 out of 5 for effective school leadership. Needs Despite these high scores for this framework element, PPA will continue to use data more efficiently to improve student achievement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders and staff will promote the use of the problems of practice inquiry approach to identify and solve problems in the instructional core resulting in improved student achievement, improved teaching practices as measured by observations, school survey results and state exam results. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parkside Preparatory Academy will create a calendar of professional development activities that will promote the problems of practice inquiry approach. Parkside Prep will identify and solve problems of practice identified in the instructional core to ensure that there is a cycle of continuous improvement. Parkside Prep will model the Bondi protocol and the problems of practice protocol to guide the work of the teacher teams. Parkside Prep will maintain documents of teacher teams for sharing outcomes schoolwide. Teachers Students Teachers Students Teachers Students Teachers Students September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 Administrators, Staff, Administrators, Staff, Administrators, Staff, Administrators, Staff, 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. For 2018-2019, school administrators and parent leaders will promote the strategies identified through the problems of practice protocol in parent meetings and parent workshops to increase parental engagement, to improve the school-home connection and to raise student achievement. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources that will be leveraged to achieve this goal include professional development by administration, staff and outside resource personnel. TLFSF and TI funds form the basis of our budgetary program and is used to support our school program. We have also received Strong Schools, Strong Communities funds and Vision for School Improvement funds to assist with maintaining our programs. Funds will be set aside for teacher per session and per diem and supervisor per session. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 1  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress monitoring will be conducted weekly during teacher team meetings, monthly during parent meetings and at the end of the marking periods. The mid-point benchmark will be February 1, 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Improved teacher practice by examining MOTP Advance reports, Progress reports, scholarship reports and observations. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths The 2018 School Quality Guide demonstrates that 94% of families say that the school communicates with them in a language and in a way that they can understand. 94% of families say that they feel well-informed by the communications they receive from the school. 100% of teachers say that families are offered opportunities to visit their child's classroom; 100% of teachers say that they undrstand families' problems and concerns; 100% of teachers say that staff regularly communicate with families about how they can help students learn. On the question of trust 94% of parents felt respected by their child's teachers. Parkside Preparatory Academy works with a number of educational partners and institutions to accomplish the Vision and the Mission for our school. Our 2018 – 2019 partners include Medgar Evers College which guides students from pre-k to college in enrichment and professional development programs for students, teachers and parents. Another strong affiliate is the Urban Advantage program which promotes professional development learnings for staff and opportunities for students to further their understanding of scientific inquiry through collaboration with urban institutions. There is a parent involvement component in the Urban Advantage Program. PPA also partners with Bike NY to enrich students' experiences outside of the classroom. The Beacon Program continues to support our instructional program by allowing students to engage in recreational, tutorial and experiential learning. NEEDS PPA needs to continue to forge partnerships with community-based organizations that support our educational plans. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, Parkside Preparatory Academy will continue to develop partnership with businesses and community-based organizations to support the school's educational plan. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The Community Network Committee will work together to create a list of organizations interested in partnering with schools. The Committee will then outreach to the organizations. Students, Parents, Teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Administrators, Staff, Community Associate The Community Network Committee will meet monthly to evaluate progress with our partner organizations. Parkside Preparatory Academy will continue to host our annual events such as the annual Community Gala and Health Fair to liase with the community and address the needs of our school. Parkside Preparatory Academy will work with the Medgar Evers Beacon CBO to provide programs that address the needs of the school and community. Parkside Preparatory Academy will apprise the community of our education goals. Students, Parents, Teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Administrators, Staff, Community Associate Students, Parents, Teachers Students, Parents, Teachers Students, Parents, Teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Administrators, Staff, Community Associate September 2018 – June 2019 Administrators, Staff, Community Associate September 2018 – June 2019 Administrators, Staff, Community Associate 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Medgar Evers Beacon Program (Academic, recreational, wellness) SUNY Downstate (Wellness, cultural awareness, STEMS) Opus Holland Foundation (Music) Helen Keller (vision screening) SSOPE - Social-emotional, engaged classrooms, restorative circles, peer mediation BikeNY (Teaching how to navigate safely through NY streets and environmental consciousness). Urban Advantage (Teacher education, family workshops, family trips to urban institutions. 4  CAMBA (Counseling) OACE (Adult Education) Liberty Academic and Sports (SHSAT) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources include all staff, including administration, teachers, coordinators and lead teachers, parent leaders, PTA members, volunteers; instructional resources including use of electronic equipment available such as Smartboards, laptops and online programs. TL FSF, and TI funds form the basis of our budgetary program and is used to support our school program. We have also received Strong Schools, Strong Communities funds and Vision for School Improvement funds to assist with maintaining our programs. Funds will be set aside for teacher per session and per diem and supervisor per session. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. School administrators and parent leaders will work to promote the work of the Community Network Committee. The timeline is September 2018 - June 2019 and the responsible personnel include the Parent bodies, (SLT, PTA, Parent Coordinator), Community Associate, staff and Administrators. By January 16, 2019, progress will be measured by the quantity and quality of our school partnerships. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Meeting agendas, notes, minutes, attendance data of events will be used to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Programs are research and Small group assistance, and During the school day and after school standards based, web and text independent computer based based, interactive and adaptive. practice Programs include guided and independent practice and progress monitoring. Examples: READ 180, Focus, Brainpop, System 44, New York Ready-ELA, EngageNY Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) English Language Arts (ELA)  Students who score below the median scale scoreof 596 for the 6th grade, 599 for 7th grade and 593 in the 8th grade in ELA are eligible for AIS services.  Baseline data for all students including ENL and Special Needs students.  Students’ test scores,  Analysis of student work including benchmarks, mid and end of unit assessments, performance tasks and ongoing classroom assessments provide data 6  Mathematics that teachers use to determine whether students are meeting the learning targets and the standards. Struggling students are identified for additional assistance and services in Tier I and Tier II intervention. Students who score below the median scale scoreof 598 for the 6th grade, 599 for 7th grade and 603 in the 8th grade inMath are eligible for AIS services.   Examples: Destination Learning, Small group assistance, and During the school day and after school IXL.com, Khan’s Academy, independent computer based Learnzillion and a variety of similar practice web based tutorial sites, NY Ready - Math, Go Math Intervention, EngageNY  Baseline data for all students including ENL and Special Needs students.  Students’ test scores 7  Science  Analysis of student work including benchmarks, mid and end of unit assessments, performance tasks and ongoing classroom assessments provide data that teachers use to determine whether students are meeting the learning targets and the standards.  Struggling students are identified for additional assistance and services in Tier I and Tier II intervention.  Baseline data, students’ test  scores, analysis of student work including benchmarks, mid and end of unit assessments, performance tasks and ongoing classroom assessments Examples: Big 8 Science, Measuring Tier I intervention in classrooms During the school day, lunch and learn up, Reviewing Intermediate Level Science 8  Social Studies provide data that teachers use to determine whether students are meeting the learning targets and the standards.  Struggling students are identified for additional assistance and services in Tier I and Tier II intervention.  Baseline data, Units based on Social Studies Tier I intervention applying reading During the school day and writing strategies used in ELA classroom to Social Studies,  Students’ test scores,  Analysis of student work including benchmarks, end of unit assessments, performance tasks and ongoing classroom assessments provide data that teachers use to determine whether students are meeting the learning targets and standards; Performance Tasks based on Common Core Standards with the focus on close reading of text and writing of explanatory and argumentative essays; Passport to Social Studies, 6, 7, 8 grades; Holt McDougal – Eastern Hemisphere – Grade 6 US History – Grades 7 and 8 9   the standards. Struggling students are identified for additional assistance and services in Tier I and Tier II intervention. Crisis management, academic and attendance counseling, guidance. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Counseling, advisories and health courses Whole class, small group, advisories, one-to-one During the school day. Restorative Circles 0  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) There are 58 students identified in temporary housing. 40 are identified as doubled-up, 10 are in shelters, 7 are in temporary living situations 6 are in permanent housing situations. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 1   Weekly check ins,  Academic intervention services to include tutoring, attendance monitoring, counseling, parent outreach,  Provide school supplies and resources ie. notebooks, pencils, learning packages, uniforms,  Job training, opportunities for parents, GED an basic education classes Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Parkside Preparatory Academy will utilize the following strategies to attract highly qualified teachers and to ensure that current staff becomes highly qualified. (1) Formulate a recruitment team to coordinate efforts to attract highly qualified staff. (2) Increase the efficiency of the highly qualified teachers already on staff through training and professional development. (3) 10% of Title I funding will be utilized to provide differentiated professional development for current staff to become highly qualified, where needed . 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Adapting where necessary, curricula that are aligned to the Common Core standards and immersing teachers into a series of PD sessions that help teachers to become familiar with the rigor needed to successfully impart the skills students need to succeed. These sessions include:  strategies for engaging students with text including annotating - Coding, re-reading, use of graphic organizers, questioning the author, UDL, strategies for ongoing assessment of learning including use of monitoring tools with rubric thinking skills for the Common Core, Integrating Common Core shifts     norming protocols for summative assessments,  protocols for working together in teacher teams  UDL strategies/differentiation, 3   Progress monitoring  Explicit, direct instruction analysis of students' work  learning from students' work   posing cognitively demanding tasks to all students  engaging students to increase outcomes  Strategies for teaching ENLs and Special Education students including Response for Intervention. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Not Applicable Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Not Applicable 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teacher teams meet to discuss, create and analyze a series of learning tasks, mid-unit, end-of-unit and final performance tasks that are built into the ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies curricula. Teacher input is also sought with regard to the baseline and benchmark assessments to be administered with a clear rationale for each assessment. All assessments are put together in an assessment calendar. The yearly pre and end-of-year MOSL assessments require teachers to norm using the SNAP protocol after which student work is analyzed to inform instruction. At every step of the way teachers are involved. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools 4  Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 404,571 0 12,366.00 0 3,402,057 X X X Section 5A, Section 5B, Section 5E Section 5A, Section 6 Section 5A, Section 5B Section 5A, Section 5B, Section 5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages: 5   Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 6  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Parkside Preparatory Academy, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Parkside Preparatory Academy will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 7  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community. Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 8  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Parkside Preparatory Academy, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will 9  share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year. 0  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences. Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs. II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; 1  ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: Parkside Preparatory Academy This school is (check one): DBN: 17K002 conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 3  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Rationale : An analysis of the NYSESLAT, NYSITELL , ELA and Mathematics results, demonstrates the need to strengthen the support of the English language acquisition of all ELL students. The ELLs who are at the Entering and Emerging levels of proficiency on the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL have shown severe deficiencies in the reading, writing, and listening modalities. These ELLs are very weak in reading comprehension, academic vocabulary, and syntax. In addition ,school wide mathematics examinations indicate that the ELL students are performing below grade level . We will address the academic deficiencies of ELLs by providing direct instruction in ELA and Mathematics via an After School program . The Title lll supplemental program will help ELL students attain English proficiency while meeting state academic achievement standards in content areas . Vocabulary instruction will also be included. Sub groups and grade levels of students to be served: All ELL students are identified through the NYSITELLand NYSESLAT examinations. The ELL students come from families that speak Haitian Creole, French, Arabic, and Spanish. There are currently 46 ELL students in Grades 6 through 8. Of this population, 2 are SIFE and 14 have IEPs. 5 of our students in Grades 6 through 8 are at the Entering level, 6 are at the Emerging level, 18 are Transitioning , and 17 are at the Expanding level of proficiency on the NYSESLATand NYSITELL. During the 2018-2019 school year, all 46 students will be serviced in the TIII afterschool program at PPA. Schedule and duration: The After -School Title lll program will begin on October 19, 2016 and will end on June 15 2017. There will be two groups. 28 students comprising of entering, emerging and transitioning in group 1 will be serviced in one group. The other 26 expanding students will comprise group 2. All ELL students will be grouped according to their proficiency levels. Classes will meet on Wednesdays and Thursdays for two hours, from 3:00 PM to 5:00 PM each day on the following dates: October 17, 18, 24, 25, 31 November 7, 8, 14, 15, 29 December 5, 6, 12, 13, 19, 20 4  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information January 3, 9, 10, 16, 17, 23, 24, 30, 31 February 6, 7, 13, 14, 27, 28 March 6, 7, 13, 14, 20, 21, 28 April 3, 4, 10, 11, 17, 18 May 1, 2, 8, 9, 15, 22, 23, 29, 30 June 5, 12, 13 Language of Instruction: At PPA, all 46 ELL students are enrolled in a freestanding ENL program. The language of instruction is English. Native language support in Arabic, French, Spanish, and Haitian Creole is provided by paraprofessionals and Educational Assistants. Picture dictionaries ,translated texts , and Internet programs such as Google translate , are also used to support language acquisition. Number and types of certified teachers : For the 2018-2019 Title lll After School program, we will hire 3 certified teachers. One teacher will be a certified ESL teacher, and in order to address the content areas of ELA and Mathematics, there will be a certified Math teacher and a certified ELA teacher. The ENL teacher will work alongside each content area teacher for one hour each After School session. Content area teachers will attend workshops to keep abreast with scaffolding strategies that can be used for ELLs. Types of materials: To address the academic needs of our ELLs, we will utilize the following research- based academic intervention programs which include differentiated lessons for direct instruction: READ180, IXL, SYSTEM44 along with the NYSESLAT texts will be used for English Language Arts. For Mathematics, we will utilize FASTT Math. The materials use will be a continuation of the materials used during the school day. Supplemental materials for Math will be CMP3 Spanish version, Go Math, NY Ready online resources and NY Ready online resources for ELA will also be used. In addition, the program will use audio CDs and consumables, student practice books, teacher guides and assessments. We will utilize translation dictionaries, glossaries, and leveled libraries. We will implement SYSTEM44 as the ELA intervention programs for those students at the Entering and Emerging levels of proficiency. For the Transitioning and Expanding levels we will utilize the READ180 program. All ELL subgroups (Entering, Emerging, Transitioning and Expanding) will utilize 5  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information FASTT Math. FASTT Math offer a broad range of academic activities for all levels of proficiencies. In addition, these programs are available in Spanish. The instructional model for these research-based intervention programs consists of Whole- Group Instruction, Small -Group Rotations, Small-Group Direct Instruction, Instructional software, Modeled and Independent Reading, followed by the Whole- Group Wrap-Up. SYSTEM 44 and READ 180 are Scholastic programs. The READ 180 program is the leading blended learning solution that accelerates learning for struggling readers by merging the latest in brain science, adaptive technology, professional development, and knowledge for school and life. For the systematic screening and progress monitoring that is central to a Response to Intervention (RTI) Approach, READ 180 offers adaptive, individualized instruction, customizable training , and professional development to ensure that educators can best serve all students. READ 180 benefits all English language learners through explicit academic language instruction, opportunities for structured academic discussion, scaffold writing techniques, and added teacher support.The READ 180 proven Instructional Model and high-interest materials, help to keep students motivated, builds a positive classroom community, and reduces behavioral challenges. Consistent routines maximize student engagement at each step of the model. System 44 is a proven foundational reading program designed to meet the needs of our most challenged readers . It is a personalized learning progression driven by technology and explicit instruction facilitated by the teacher and engages students in reading, writing, language, speaking and listening. These programs create a lexile framework for reading by matching students to books , setting reading goals , and monitoring reading progress. Endorsed by the Council of Administrators of Special Education (CASE), these programs are proven to raise reading achievement for students with learning disabilities, and include specific supports and scaffolds to address each student’s unique learning needs. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: 6  Part C: Professional Development Rationale: All teachers in the Title III After School program will continue to participate in high quality professional development provided by The Division of English Language Learners and Student Support (DELLSS) , the Scholastic Reading program, the Borough Support Centers and Webinars provided by external educational programs. All teachers who service ELLs will attend workshops that pertain to, but are not limited to, differentiated instruction, using data to plan instruction for ELLs. Teachers of ELLs will continue to incorporate ESL strategies in the instruction of ELLs across all content areas. Teachers to receive training: All teachers who are responsible for the instruction of ELL students during the regular school day and after school will participate in PD activities offered by DELLSS and other internal offerings after school and on weekends. Professional Development logs will be utilized so that teachers can keep track of PDs. Reflection logs will also be used to determine how teachers implement training from the workshops into practice. Supervisors will observe classes to evaluate the effectiveness of the strategies and the progress of students. Parkside Preparatory Academy uses binders to maintain agendas and attendance sheets. Schedule and duration The following teachers will participate in professional development activities: The ESL Teacher, the ELA Teacher, and the Math Teacher will participate in the professional development offered by DELLSS as well as other internal offerings. Other teachers who are responsible for the instruction of ELLs during the day will also participate in workshops that pertain to, but not limited to the list below: Topics to be covered: - Differentiated instruction for ELLs. - Using data to plan instruction for ELLs - Developing Academic Vocabulary for the ELL student - Learning from students' work - Using Informational Text with SIFE Students - Writing Learning Targets for the ELLs - R.T.I for ELLs Framework - Data Analysis and the Title III AMAO Estimator Tool Schedule and duration: Workshops will be ongoing during the school year. 7 Part C: Professional Development Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: Meaningful parent and family involvement is critical to the academic success of ELL students. It is our responsibility to initiate and facilitate this development. Parents are invited to participate in activities such instructional technology workshops , family math and literacy workshops , and also the Adult Education program that offers courses such as ENL , Basic Education , and the GED. In addition , during the parent orientation and ELL identification process, parents are provided with numerous opportunities to give input to the school. Parents are active members of the PTA and the SLT. The Parent Coordinator, Ms. Joanne Mobley, helps to establish strong communications for the families of our ELL students. At our school, parents are also provided with a designated room where they can gather, sit, drink coffee or tea, post and read announcements in different languages, or to meet fellow parents. Parents are also invited to visit classrooms on a regular basis to celebrate students’ work and to address specific concerns. Schedule and duration: We have scheduled the following ELLs parent involvement engagement activities for the school year 2018-2019: - Curriculum night - Thursday, September 20, 2018 - ELLs Parent orientation Meeting Thursday, September 13, 2018 - Title III meeting – Thursday, October 18, 2018, to provide parents with information about the Title III Supplemental Program 8  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities - Instructional Technology Workshops for Imagine Learning, Destination Math, FASTT Math, IXL and Read 180 programs – to be announced - Health Fairs - to be announced - Family Math and Literacy workshops – to be announced - Open school Night – report cards - Celebrations of cultural diversity (Multicultural Festivals – Flag Day , Career Day , Food Fest) Topics to be covered: - Accessing periodic assessments and other exams - Data Analysis - Community resources - Discipline - Health - Adult Education - Instructional technology Name of provider: The ELLs' meetings and workshops for parents will be conducted by teachers of ELLs. We will also invite guests speakers from community agencies and cultural groups. Parent Notification of these activities: Our efforts to facilitate meaningful communication with the families of our ELLs, involve face-to-face and over-the-phone contact in the parents’ primary language. Translation is also available in written format. All information including letters, brochures, invitations, and conference materials are translated into the parents’ primary language. Translated information for parents of ELLs is posted around the school. 9 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. The cost of this program will be over the amount allotted for the Title III Program. Extra expenditures will come from other funding sources N/A Instructional materials, workbooks, dictionaries and calculators N/A N/A N/A N/A Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $6366  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff N/A and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL $6000 N/A N/A N/A $12,366 0  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 17 School Name Parkside Preparatory Academy Borough Brooklyn School Number 002 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Adrienne Spencer Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Annie Benn Teacher/Subject Area Noura Moustapha Teacher/Subject Area Max Edouard Related-Service Provider Ingrid Pierre Superintendent Clarence Ellis Assistant Principal Fitzroy Hayles Coach N/A School Counselor Ebony Valentine Parent Loukenson Claude Parent Coordinator Joanne Mobley Field Support Center Staff Member Joanne Benoit Other (Name and Title) Amal Ismaiel C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 505 1 Total number of ELLs 64 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 12.67%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown Program TBE School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) Once SIFE status is determined, teachers will work with students using the Scholastic System 44, IXL and FASTT Math programs. Teachers will Lang. The following assessment tools are used to assess the early literacy skills of ELLs: Assessment Tools: Performance Series Scholastic Reading Inventory (SRI) Scholastic Phonics Inventory (SPI) Read 180 FASTT Math Fountas and K NYS Report card data indicates a need for ELLs to show improvement in the Math State assessment. 8th grade ELLs data sho1 2 Once the summative data has been gathered it is analysed by teachers who create strategies and plans to assist these ELLs in gaining proficiency in their L2. Language Paraprofessionals, NEWSELA, and picture dictionaries are also used to support N/A 3 The NYSESLAT data revealed that out of a total number of 56 students, 21 are at the advanced (Expanding) in proficiency levels, 20 4 Teacher team discussions, data study, analysis and feedback, congruence meetings with subject 5 The ELL program offered at PPA is the Freestanding English as a New language (ENL) program. This program provides instruction in English with home language Tot # 5015 9 Instruction for ELLs is scaffolded. The ESL teacher and the content area teachers are trained in QTEL scaffolding strategies. QTE10 We ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their native language throughout the year by evaluating students who are Spanish speakers, and first time entran11 6a.SIFE Instructional Plan for SIFE There are six (6) ELLs who are SIFE. Instruction for SIFE is differentiated so as to create a balance between academic content and students' individual needs. This balance is achieved by modifying four specific elements related to our curriculum12 The instructional strategies used include modeling, contextualizing, bridging , meta-cognition, and Q-TEL while grade level materials include IXL which addresses all content areas, System 44, Read 6 7 8 N/A N/A Beginning September 2017, PPA will have 5 proficiency levels for ELLs based on the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT; the fifth level, proficient/commanding, continues to indicate the student is not an ELL as per CR Part 154 Requirements for English as a New Language 2 students L1. Progress will be monitored through data collection, analysis and response to intervention. use planning periods to plan, discuss strategies, and students' progress. We use an iterative cycle of assessment, analysis, inferencing and adjustment to instruction. This will provide opportunities to monitor students' progress and to make adjustments where needed. Pinnell Periodic Assessments System 44 NYSED Oral Interview Questionnire MSL Writing Screener Students with Interrupted Formal Education who are ELLs , and have attended school in the U.S.A and District of Columbia ,for less than 12 months and who have , upon initial enrollment two or more years below grade level in literacy in their home language and /or two or more years below grade level in mathematics due to inconsistent or interrupted schooling prior to arriving in the U.S will be determinws a 6.4% increase in level 3 and 4 performances for period 2016 – 2017. We will evaluate the success of our programs for ELLs by assessing how many have tested out of the NYSESLAT and their growth within the modalities. Success will also be measured by the ELLs perfarea and ENL teachers all lead to adjustments in the programs. are transitioning, 8 are Emerging and 6 are at the Entering level. ELA and Math outcome assessments are used to evaluate and inform the ELL programs to guide instruction. support, emphasizing English language acquisition. Students in this freestanding ENL program come from many different language backgrounds, and English, in some cases, is the only common language among these students. Our Freestanding English as a New Language (ENL) program provides instruction in English with home language support, emphasizing English langu. Below is a breakdown of the mandated number of minutes according to proficiency levels. Levels (as of 2015-16 SY) Total # Minutes ENL Breakdown of Total # Minutes ENL Minimum # minutes standalone ENL Minimum # minutes integrated ENL Flexibility: Minimum # minutes standalone OR integrated ENL (with ELA or any other content area) Beginner / Entering 360 180 180 integrated ENL/ELA 0 Low Intermediate / Emerging 360 90 180 integrated ENL/ELA 90 Intermediate / Transitioning 180 0 90 integrated ENL/ELA L scaffold strategies and ENL methodologies are used by teachers of ELLs. In addition, native language support is provided to ELLs by language paraprofessionals in Arabic, French, Haitian Creole, and Spanish. The ENL program has accumulated over the years, resource materials to address the acadts into the U.S, using the Spanish LAB. The NYSITELL is also administered to students for ELLs identification. This is the only time that new entrants are administered these assessments. The Spanish LAB measures their proficiency in their L1. Parents of these students must first complete a Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) at registration. It is the responsibility of the certified ESL teacher and LAB coordi: • Content — the information and skills that students need to learn • Process — how students make sense of the content being taught • Product — how students demonstrate what they have learned • Affect — the feelings and attitudes that affect students' learning These curriculum-related factors are based on student need in three areas: • Readiness — students' preparation for learning specific information or skills • Interest — what appeals to students and thus motivates them to learn • Learning Profile — how students approach the task of learning Our goal of differentiated 180, Fastt Math, Destination Math and adapted subject-area curricula. The Entering / Emerging ELLs with special needs receive intervention via SYSTEM44 and Imagine Learning and the Transitioning and Expanding will receive intervention via READ 180. Recommended testing accommodations are available to all special needs students based on their Individualized Education Programs. Long-Term ELLs will also be placed in the READ 180 progra3  ed within 30 days from initial enrollment as SIFE. This determination will begin at the time of completion of the HLIS when the parent is asked to indicate prior schooling.All steps used to identify ELLs will also be followed. If there are indicators within the ELLs identification process that a student has interrupted or inconsistent formal schooling, we will proceed with the SIFE Identification Process outlined for students who are : Newly identified ELLs and in grades 3-9 , and at the beginning /entering or low intermediate/ emerginormance on city and statewide mandated assessments .This will include NYS Assessments and High School Regents Examinations. In addition, emphasis would be placed on the movement of students towards graduation and attaining promotional advancements between grades. age acquisition. PPA is utilizing the Stand-alone and push-in types of ENL program. In the push-in model an ENL teacher works with ELLs in collaboration with general education classroom teachers to provide language acquisition and vocabulary support. There is a common preparation time between the 2 teachers and/or prior collaborative lesson planning. The Stand-alone ENL is 90 Advanced / Expanding 180 0 180 integrated ENL/ELA or other content area 0 Proficient / Commanding** 90 0 90 integrated ENL/ELA or other content area 0 emic needs of ELLs.These materials are available in all content areas. Translation dictionaries and picture dictionaries are also used to scaffold the content for our ELLs. AIS support is offered to our ELLs through READ 180, IMAGINE Learning , IXL and SYSTEM 44. DESTINATION Math and FASTT m for enrichment. nator, trained in student intake procedures, instruction is to create learning opportunities that make allowances for to differences discuss the home language with the family and provide assessments to determine eligibility for the ESL program which supports their L1 and L2. To ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their native language, the students are given the choice to complete the exam in their native language. Translation dictionaries and glossaries are providin how individual students learn in order to ensure equal access to important academic content. Content is modified for our SIFE who need multiple options for accessing information. Modifications in other areas will ultimately allow all students to master the same key content. We currently have an ENL lab, equipped with Scholastic intervention programs. These programs SYSTEM44, READ180, FASTT Math and Imagine Learning help us differentiate instruction for SIFE. These are research-based programs designed to accelerate reading proficiency 4  g level of proficiency on the NYSESLAT. The NYSED Oral Interview Questionnaire , NYSED Multilingual Literacy SIFE Screener (MLS) , and the Writing Screener will be used in the SIFE identification process. SIFE status will be indicated in the DOE's data collection system (BNDC) no later than 30 days from the initial enrollment. As per CR Part 154 , we have 1 year to make a final determination of SIFE status. Initial SIFE identification will be modified for up to 1 year. The SRI data shows that most students had a lexile level below instruction to develop English language skills so that students can succeed in core content courses. It is delivered by a certified ENL teacher, Annie Benn. Student do not receive stand-alone ENL in lieu of core content area instruction at PPA. Students travel together in heterogeneous or homogeneous groups, to the ENL classroom for differentiated instruction accored to the students. Math are used for our Math program. These programs are available in several languages such as Haitian Creole, Spanish and French, and are used by students who still need extra support in their native language. The intervention programs address differentiated instruction for ELLs for our SIFE. Some of these programs also offer language support in French, Arabic, Spanish, and Haitian Creole. In addition, teachers use QTEL scaffolding strategies, visual aides, TPR strategies and tiers 1, 2, and 3 vocabulary along with grade-appropriate content in order to address the SIFE needs in ENL and all content areas . Instruction for these students, as mandated by CR Part 154 for ENL, consists of 360 minutes per week for Entering and Emerging and for Transitioning and Expanding 180 minutes each week. Once a SIFE student is performing at or above the transitioning/intermediate level on the annual English language proficiency 5  400. These students will be placed in the SYSTEM 44 and Imagine Learning programs . Students who have tested above this level will receive READ 180 as their intervention programs. To assess the reading levels and language dominance of Spanish newcomers Spanish LAB and the Academic Language and Literacy Diagnostic test are used . Fountas and Pinnell is used to level classroom libraries for access by students based on their lexiles. This information provides identification of strengths and weaknesding to their lexile and proficiency levels . These ELLs also receive academic intervention services using SYSTEM 44, READ180, IMAGINE Learning, Destination Math and FASTT Math. All ELLs and former ELLs up to 2 years after exiting ELL status receive a minimum number of units of integrated ENL. In order to provide content area support for ELLs, the ENL teacher assessment, the student’s status as a Student with Inconsistent/Interrupted Formal Education is removed, even though the student may continue to be identified as an English Language Learner. 6 b. Newcomers PPA has 25 Newcomer ELLs who arrived very recently and exhibit little or no knowledge of English. While newly arrived ELLs are represented among the group of newcomer ELLs, many others are US-born and are at the emerging, transitioning, or higher levels. These programs assist us in achieving our goal of differentiated instruction to create learning opportunities that make allowances 6  ses. This way, targeted assistance may be given. It also identifies trends in performance for our school which is consequently used in instructional planning. focuses on grade level content as well as the English language skills needed to access that content. The teacher creates and post language objectives that are aligned to the CCLS. Cognates are also used to develop comprehension in English, texts are introduced before reading, ELLs are taught to navigate text books effectively. Students are also taken on educational field for differences in how individual students learn in order to ensure equal access to important academic content. Teachers of ELLs also use QTEL scaffolding strategies, along with visual aides, and TPR strategies as means of differentiating instruction for newcomers. As a result content is modified using multiple options for these students who need additional practice with essential elements before moving on. However, the expectation is that modifications in other areas will ultimately allow all students to master the same key content. To address the language barrier, paraprofessionals are used to interpret and translate content. PPA also 7  trips. Tiered vocabulary essential to full participation in the content areas is taught. Language learning strategies and skills to aid in comprehension are also used to assist students with the L2. Picture dictionaries, language paraprofessionals, and realia are also used to support ELLs in the content areas. PPA also uses text books that are available in the studeuses bilingual dictionaries and Google translate to assist in translations. Instruction for these students as mandated by CR Part 154 for ENL consists of 360 minutes per week for Entering and Emerging and for Transitioning and Expanding 180 minutes each week. Once a SIFE student is performing at or above the transitioning/intermediate level on the annual English language proficiency assessment, the student’s status as a Student with Inconsistent/Interrupted Formal Education is removed, even though the student may continue to be identified as an English Language Learner. 6.c Developing 8  nts'L1. PPA has 12 developing ELLs identified under CR Part 154 who have received English as a New Language instruction, as a component of their bilingual education or freestanding English as a New Language program, for a total of four (4) to six (6) continuously enrolled school years in the United States. At PPA the ENL lab is equipped with Scholastic intervention programs and Imagine Learning. These programs assist us to achieve our goal of differentiated instruction to create learning opportunities that make allowances for differences in how individual students learn in order to ensure equal access to important academic content. Teachers of ELLs 9  also use rigorous standards based instruction in the content areas along with QTEL scaffolding strategies, visual aides, and TPR strategies as an approach to differentiating instruction for our developing ELLs. As a result content is modified using multiple options for these students who need additional practice with essential elements before moving on. However, the expectation is that modifications in other areas will ultimately allow all students to master the same key content. To tackle the language barrier, paraprofessionals are used to interpret and translate content. PPA also uses bilingual dictionaries and Google translate 0  to support native language. Weekly instruction for ENL as mandated by CR Part 154 consists of the following : CR Part 154 Requirements for English as a New Language, Grades K to 8 Levels (as of 2017-18 SY) Beginner / Entering 360 minutes Low Intermediate / Emerging 360 minutes Intermediate / Transitioning 180 minutes Advanced / Expanding 180 minutes Proficient / Commanding** 90 minutes 6.d Long Term PPA has 7 long term ELLs. These are ELLs identified under CR Part 154 who have received English as a new language instruction, as a component of their bilingual education or freestandi1  ng English as a new language program, for seven (7) or more continuously enrolled school years in the United States. The ESL instructional support for these Long -Term ELLs includes the development of reading comprehension skills, vocabulary development, the completion of standards based writing projects along with QTEL scaffolding strategies and visual aides as an approach to differentiating instruction for our long term ELLs. Content is modified using multiple options for these students who need additional practice with content vocabulary and essential elements before moving on; however, the expectation is that modificatio2  ns in other areas will ultimately allow all students to master the same key content. Language paraprofessionals are used to interpret and translate content where needed. PPA also uses bilingual dictionaries and Google translate to support native language. Weekly instruction for ENL as mandated by CR Part 154 consists of the following: CR Part 154 Requirements for English as a New Language*, Grades K to 8 Levels (as of 2017-18 SY) Beginner / Entering 360 minutes Low Intermediate / Emerging 360 minutes Intermediate / Transitioning 180 minutes Advanced / Expanding 180 minutes Proficient / 3  Commanding** 90 minutes 6.e Former ELLs up to 2 years after exiting ELL status PPA has 12 former ELLs. These are students who had been identified as English language learners and subsequently exited from ELL status. For at least two years following the school year in which a student is exited from ELL status, former ELLs receive at least one half of one unit of study of English as a New Language (90 minutes per week) and are eligible for certain specified testing accommodations. Direct instruction is used to further support the language development of former ELLS. Standards - based instruction is 4  differentiated to provide students with multiple entry points for taking in information, making sense of ideas, and expressing what they learn. Teachers use QTEL strategies and focus on academic vocabulary in order to allow equal access to important academic content. ELL Testing Accommodations at PPA All ELLs and former ELLs are eligible for ELL testing accommodations, in addition to any accommodations on their IEPs or 504 Plans, if applicable. PPA determines which accommodations are most suitable and beneficial (will maximize the potential for achievement on all exams) for each ELL at the beginning of the school 5  year. ELLs are entitled to using those accommodations for most assessments, including those that are teacher-made and State-mandated. ELLs are not entitled to ELL testing accommodations on the NYSESLAT. PPA also provides testing accommodations to ELLs, as needed, on all NYS ELA and content-area assessments (i.e., mathematics, science and social studies). PPA makes all necessary arrangements to make these accommodations available for ELLs who need them. PPA also uses the list of NYS-approved accommodations found in the School Administrator's Manual (SAM) for each respective test. Testing 6  accommodations for ELL students on the NYS ELA and content-area assessments include the following: • Time extension (all exams): Schools may extend the test time for ELL students on NYS ELA and content-area assessments and on Regents examinations. PPA Principal may use any reasonable extensions, such as "time and a half" (the required testing time plus half that amount), in accordance with their best judgment about the needs of the ELL students. PPA Principal will consult with the student's classroom teacher in making these determinations. However, there are no time limits. • Separate location (all exams): 7  Schools are encouraged to provide optimal testing environments and facilities for ELL students. NYS assessments may be administered to ELLs individually or in small groups in a separate location. • Third reading of listening selection (English Language Arts exams only): Proctors may read the listening passage three times to ELLs on grades 3-8 English Language Arts assessments and on the Regents Comprehensive Examination in English. • Bilingual dictionaries and/or glossaries: ELLs may use bilingual glossaries when taking State examinations in all subjects except languages other than English exams 8  (LOTE). The bilingual dictionaries and glossaries may provide only direct one-to-one translations of words. Bilingual dictionaries and/or glossaries that provide definitions or explanations are not permitted. Bilingual glossaries in the content areas are available for downloading. • Simultaneous use of English and alternative language editions are not allowed for English Language Arts examinations. For state examinations for which SED provides written translations, ELLs may use both English and an alternative language edition of the test simultaneously. However, they should be instructed to record all of their responses in only one 9  language. The alternative language edition used by the student should be so indicated on the student's answer sheet. • Oral translations for low incidence languages are not allowed for English Language Arts examinations. Schools may provide ELL students with an oral translation of a state examination when there is no translated edition provided by SED. All translations must be oral, direct translations of the English editions. Written translations are not allowed. No clarifications or explanations may be provided. Translators should receive copies of the English edition of the tests one hour prior to administration. • Writing 0  TBE responses in the home language are not allowed for English Language Arts examinations. ELL students making use of alternative language editions or of oral translations of state examinations may write their responses to the open-ended question in their home languages. Scoring the tests is the responsibility of the school. 2. Our guidance counselor will continue to provide assistance to staff to work with ELLs as they transition from the Elementary to Middle school, and Middle school to High school. PPA provides professional development to all teachers and administrators that specifically addresses the needs PPA meets individually with the parents or guardians of English Language Learners annually. This additional meeting includes the ENL Teacher along with staff necessary to sufficiently inform parents or guardia4833 The ESL instructional plan for these students consists of the following: 1. Rigorous standards based instruction in the content areas via stand alone and push-in scaffold instruction with native language support. 2. Pull-out interventions in ELA and Mathematics - READ180, Proficiency Level ELA Intervention Programs Math Intervention Programs Entering/Emerging System 44, IXL, Afterschool Programs, Saturday Programs FASTT Paste response to question here: New Programs for ELLs 2017 - 2019 a. Guidance Intervention b. Celebrations of cultural diversity c. CollN/A All ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs during the regular school day, after school and vacation school. All ELLs are ESL Instructional Materials The following is a partial list of literacy programs that are utilized to provide ESL through the content areas: ENL All new entrants whose HLIS responses indicate a home language of Spanish and who are newly ide The school ensures that all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs ages and grade levels through constant monitoring, through assessments, congruence and NA The following activities are initiated at our school in order to assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning and throughout the school year as follo Spanish is offered as an elective to ELLs. Language support is also given to ELLs by paraprofessions and teachers who speak Arabic, French, and Haitian Creole. N/A The challenges of the Common Core Standards affect the Special Needs students in many ways. Therefore, strategies for the ELLs and SPEDs are similar. Goals: To ensure all teachers are 1 ege Access For All d. Robotics e. Programming f. Project Green Imagine Learning, and Destination Math. Below is a breakdown of the mandated number of minutes according to proficiency levels. Levels (as of 2017-19 SY) Total # Minutes ENL Breakdown of Total # Minutes ENL Minimum # minutes standalone ENL Minimum # minutes integrated ENL Flexibility: Minimum # minutes standalone OR integrated ENL (with ELA or any other content area) Beginner / Entering 360 180 180 integrated ENL/ELA 0 Low Intermediate / Emerging 360 90 18Math, IXL, Afterschool Programs, Saturday Programs Transitioning Read 180, IXL, Afterschool Programs, Saturday Programs FASTT Math, Destination Math, IXL, Afterschool Programs, Saturday Programs Expanding Read 180, IXL, Afterschool Programs, Saturday Programs FASTT Math, Destination Matteam meetings with subject area teachers. Conferencing, goal-setting and goal-monitoring are also practices used to ensure that students engage in self-assessment. Progress checks form part of the yearly assessment calendar. placed in classes (general and special education) that are heterogeneously grouped. All students including the ELL population are invited to participate in all extended day programs provided by CBO's and programs that are funded through grants. They also include services offered * Longman Shining Star * Holt McDougal- Eastern Hemisphere * Longman Keys to Learning * McGraw on Location * Longman Content Area Series: Science and Social Studies *Longman Literature Library * Oxford Picture Dictionaries and workbooks * Leveled Libraries with books of diffentified as ELLs based on NYSITELL results are administered the Spanish LAB at the time of initial enrollment (or re-enrollment ) during the same 10-day testing window. The Spanish LAB is used to support our instructional ws: * Open House for newly enrolled ELLs with translators and interpretors in their home language by qualified staff. These meetings are organized by the guidance counselors. The parent coordinator and the ENL teacher/ coordinator. * District/Middle School Fairs for new entrants prepared to implement the CCSS for ELLs and SPEDs. To provide access to ELLs and SPEDs in the curriculum. Strategic Objective - Professional Development: • Continue to train teachers in strategies for accommodating ELLS and SPEDs in instruction and assessment. • Ensure parental involvement activities/workshops. • Provide time for collaborating between generaof English Language Learners. A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CR Part 80 is ns about the child’s language development progress, language proficiency assessments, and languagdedicated e to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. For all bilingual and English as a new language teachers, a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required professional development hours must be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies development needs in all content areas in English and in the child’s home language. PPA also informs parents about the Common Core Learning Standards, assessments, and school expectations for ELLs. Such meeting is conducted with a qualified interpreter/translator in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardia2  0 integrated ENL/ELA 90 Intermediate / Transitioning 180 0 90 integrated ENL/ELA 90 Advanced / Expanding 180 0 180 integrated ENL/ELA or other content area 0 Proficient / Commanding** 90 0 90 integrated ENL/ELA or other content area 0 h, IXL, Afterschool Programs, Saturday Programs Commanding Read 180, IXL, Afterschool Programs, Saturday Programs FASTT Math, Destination Math, IXL, Afterschool Programs, Saturday Programs * Language clinics in L1 and L2 during the summer * Title III Summer programs by Beacon, Medgar Evers College, the Leadership Program and academic programs provided by the school. planning in providing ENL services to students. Spanish LAB results are not used to determine ELL status or service entitlement. rent genres * Dictionaries of American English *Audio tapes * Video Tapes *RIGOR b. Instructional Technology Imagine Learning * Scholastic Intervention Program – SYSTEM 44, READ 180, FASTT Math *Destination Math c. Language Materials * Bilingual Dictionarn best understands. PPA determines the manner and form of such individual parent meetings, in accordance with collective bargaining agreements. Attendance is recorded using existing procedures. Printed information to parents is also translated into the language that the parent or guardian best understands. l education teachers and the ESL/SPED teachers. • Continue to examine tasks, assessments, standards in terms of modification and adaptations. • Explore the new Language Arts Bilingual Common Core Instructional progression and Home Language Arts Progression (NLA) (Ells only) • Consider an Individual Learning Plan for the ELLs student and ensure a quality IEP development and impleand integrating language and content instruction for English language learners Our ELL compliance specialist will continue to provide training for all staff. Documentation of this training includes attendance, copies of certificates and materials given to workshops. The ENL teacher and teachers' of ELLs will continue to engage in collaborative planning in order to enrich the quality of education for other ELLs. Logs will be kept for this common planning. Alternative training in test translations will be given to bilingual staff members so that they can become proficient in administering city and state wide tests to the students in 3  ies * Multicultural Libraries in Haitian Creole and Spanish (Instructional technology programs are available in French, Arabic, Haitian Creole and Spanish) their native language as per 504 accommodations and /or IEP mandates. mentation for SPEDs. • Examine how culture impacts learning (ELLs only) • Professional Development in Shared Pathways for all personnel • UDL strategies for multiple entry points • SESIS training • RTI for ELLs/SPEDs – tiered instructional approaches • Reading strategies for ELLs/SPEDs/struggling learners • Behavioral supports – implementing BIPs, FBAs for SPEDs • Impleme4  nt State changes to assessing NYSAA students. Responsible Persons: Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers, Parents Timeline: September 2017 – June 2018 Professional development that is offered to teachers of ELLs are as follows: a. Teaching ELLs -UDL Strategies that work b. Beyond Academic Vocabulary: Academic language to support grade level instruc5  tion (Grades 6 - 11) c. Supporting the Academic Needs of SIFE in Secondary Schools (Grades 6-11) d. Curriculum Mapping: Strategies for Successful Implementation of ELL Programs e. Building a Strong and Effective Tier 1 Reading Instruction for English Language Learners in the Responsive to Intervention (RtI) Framework f. Developing Academic Language and Literacy Skills in the 6 Science Classroom g. Writing Language Objectives for English Language Learners (ELLs) in the Mathematics Classroom These PDs support teachers as they provide scaffolding, multiple entry points and access for all learners. Adrienne Spencer Parkside Preparatory Academy 17K002 Adrienne Spencer 9/20/17 Fitzroy Hayles 9/20/17 Joanne Mobley 9/20/17 Annie Benn 1/1/01 1/1/01 19 TBE N/A The parental involvement activities for the parents of ELLs are planned in order to help parents improve the academic success of their children. At PPA Parents are important partners in the education of all of 7  our students including ELLs and Special Education students. Our ELL parental involvement at PPA is comprehensive and includes a number of parent engagement activities and meetings. Our parents are involved in PTA activities, SLT, Parent Teacher conferences, Title I and Title III meetings, disciplinary meetings , Family Math and Family Literacy Meetings, and Cultural diversity celebrations. Our parent coordinator serves as a conduit by which parents participate in their child's overall development at PPA. We have improved our level of 8  communication with parents by providing them with translated resources in their native languages. We have a new parent support system in place to make the students' families feel more welcome and to provide them access to the tools they need in order to fully participate in the education of their children. The ELLs Parental calendar for the 2017-2018 school year includes the following: - ELLs parent orientation meetings, telephone conferences with parents of ELLs, monthly Family Math and Literacy Programs, and 9  access training to NYC DOE web sites. Parents are also given information about the Department of Adult and Continuing Education so that they may attend classes to strengthen their abilities to assist their children in English. DL 1/1/01 DL DL Total 1/1/01 4047.064 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 Ebony Valentine 1/1/01 1/1/01 9/20/17 Ellis Clarke 9/20/17 1/1/01 4 3 0 9874 1 17 337 0 49 1 0.03 0 224 4027 585.35 586 Part III: Assessment Analysis After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 0  4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. b. TBE program. If applicable. c. DL program. If applicable. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 1  6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. 2  c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 3 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, , testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 4  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 5  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 17K002 School Name: Parkside Preparatory Academy (PPA) Superintendent: Clarence Ellis The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this (Primary) Annie Benn ESL Teacher Joanne Amal Mobley Ismaiel Parent Coordinator Paraprofessional conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. PPA will determine within 30 (thirty) days of a student’s enrollment (or, for students already enrolled, by a date and procedure to be determined by the Office of Teaching and Learning) the primary language spoken by the parent of each student enrolled in the school, and if such language is not English, whether the parent requires language assistance in order to communicate effectively with the Department. PPA will maintain an appropriate and current record of the primary language of each parent. Such information will be maintained in ATS and on the student emergency card. PPA administers the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) to determine the student’s home language as part of general intake procedures. The school has to determine the home language within 30 days of a student's enrollment. The home language is determined based on the results of the HLIS, which include an interview with 6  both parent and student in English or the preferred language of the parent. Part III of the HLIS asks supplementary questions that require parents to identify the following : 1. What language the parent likes to receive written information from PPA . 2. What language the parent prefers to communicate orally with PPA . The response to these supplementary questions on the HLIS, reports on ATS and the Student Emergency Contact cards , assist PPA in compiling a list of preferred languages and maintaining a record of all primary languages of each parent for written and oral communication . The data , from the HLIS (2017-18)for the three newcomers entering PPA, and have recently arrived in the USA for the first time, shows that one parent chose Haitian Creole as his language preference for both written and oral communication ,while two parents chose Arabic as their language preference for both written and oral communication . It is the policy at PPA that all correspondences to all parents who need language assistance must be translated into the preferred language of parents. Correspondences are distributed in both English and the preferred language of parents . Oral communication is provided by staff members proficient in the L1 of parents . Over-the-phone interpretation services are also available for use by PPA through the DOE’s Translation and Interpretation Unit so that parents can receive language assistance and have their questions answered in their preferred languages. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language The preferred languages for both written and oral communication are Spanish , French , Arabic, Fulani , and Haitian Creole . Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish-22 Haitian Creole-16 Spanish-39% Haitian Creole-16% French-4% Arabic-29% French-2 Arabic-16 Written Preferred Percent Written Spanish-22 Haitian Creole-16 French-2 Arabic-16 Spanish-39% Haitian Creole-29% French-4% Arabic-29% English-57 English-100% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. NONE Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 7  1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The Translation and Interpretation unit, the school’s designated language access team, versed in the language of our parents, will provide translation and interpretation for face-to-face meetings. September 2017 - June 2018 PPA provides parents ,whose primary language is a covered language ,with a translation of any document that contains individual, student-specific information regarding, but not limited to, a student’s: a. health; b. safety; c. legal or disciplinary matters; and d. entitlement to public education or placement in any Special Education, English Language Learner or non-standard academic program. The following documents are translated by PPA : *Monthly news letters , *Monthly calendars , *Quarterly parent teacher announcements *NYS testing dates and preparation *Promotion in doubt letters *Letters from the school leadership to parents . In addition , parents are informed about after school programs and ELL meetings in their preferred languages as per the HLIS ,ATS , and Student Contact. 8  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? PPAs designated language coordinator along with staff proficient in the L1 of parents will be used as resources to assist with the formal face-to-face meetings throughout the year. Notices to parents will be translated and sent to parents in a timely manner as per the DOE. Parent teacher meetings occur at PPA quarterly . Curriculum night is also planned periodically at PPA . Enrollment -ongoing throughout the year ELL parent meetings - quarterly 11/8/2017, 11/30/2017 2/7/2018, 5/9/2018, ELL orientations / program selection meeting - ongoing throughout the year 6/26/2018 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. The Translation and Interpretation Unit and PPAs designated language coordinator will be used as resources to assist with parent communication in the event of an emergency. 9  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The Translation and Interpretation Unit will provide periodic training to our parent coordinator and other key school-based personnel on the language access requirements. This training will be turn-keyed at PD sessions. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) To fulfill section VII of the Chancellor's Regulation Parkside Preparatory Academy will provide each parent ,whose primary language is a covered language and who require language assistance services, with a translated copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services. PPA will also post in a conspicuous location at or near the primary entrance to the school a sign in each of the covered languages, or most prominent covered languages, indicating the availability of interpretation services. Our safety plan will contain procedures for ensuring that parents in need of language access services are not prevented from reaching the school’s administrative offices solely due to language barriers. If the parents of more than 10% of the children at PPA speak a primary language that is neither English nor a covered language, we shall obtain from the Translation and Interpretation Unit a translation into such language of the signage and forms required pursuant to this section and shall post and provide such forms in accordance with this section. The Department’s website shall provide information in each of the covered languages concerning the rights of parents to translation and interpretation services and how to access such services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? A survey of our parents will be used to gather feedback on the quality and availability of services. Language preferences on HLIS, ATS reports, and Student Emergency Contact cards are solid indicators of the language preferences of parents. Parents have indicated that they prefer to receive both written and oral communication in their native language accompanied by the English version however, during conferences, parents prefer to have interpreters available in their native languages. 00 
