 75K004 School Name: P.S. K004 Principal: REBECCA SCHROPFER   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information P.S. K004 307500013004 P-5 School Number (DBN): 75K004 530 Stanley Avenue, Brooklyn , NY 11207 929-275-3946 Phone Number: 718-927-3554 Fax: Beatrice Jocelyn bjocely@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Rebecca Schropfer Gloria Barber Yanissa Bennett Rebecca Schropfer N/A N/A N/A N/A District Information District 75 Ketler Louissaint Geographical District: Superintendent’s Office Address: Superintendent: 400 1 st Ave Street NY, NY 10010 klouiss@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-802-1503 Phone Number: 212-802-1678 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Brooklyn (District 19) Marie Callaghan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director’s Email Address: Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street Brooklyn NY, 11211 Mcallaghan4@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: Network 2: 1212-802-1604 1212-802-1688 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Rebecca Schropfer Gloria Barber Yanissa Bennett Teresa Jones N/A N/A N/A James Reilly Marcus Rivera Morgen Gittens Mattie Ma Gee *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Member/UFT Member/UFT Member/UFT Member/Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Keenya Kersey Alison Best GillermoMendo IlhamQanbili N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our P4K 'Belief System of How Children Learn Best' embraces a culture of high expectations for high teacher quality and practice and improved student achievement. We impart rigorous, engaging and differentiated hands-on, concrete learning experiences through our new shift of integrated focus in trans-disciplinary Learning of Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts, Mathematics (STEAM), and the NYS Next Generation Learning Standards (NGLS) - aligned Curriculum Map that is driven by the research-based 3-E Instructional Model within the Interdisciplinary / Trans-  disciplinary Center – based Learning Approach. It is important to note that STEAM will also drive and develop student focused Literary Skills. Here are highlights of our mission and vision to meet our students’ learning needs: P4K Belief System of How Children Learn Best. ● P4K believes that children learn best by being immersed in a learning environment that is filled with opportunities for student Engagement, Exploration and Evaluation. We endeavor to establish this positive learning environment through Center - based Learning, Positive Behavior Support Program, and access to Standard - based Curricula and Assessments. We recognize and attempt to close the gap between what children can perform with adult guidance and what children can do independently. We believe that a wide variety of differentiated strategies such as scaffolding, visual/verbal/physical supports will nurture and promote the achievement of student IEPs, academic and behavioral goals and objectives. We have internalized the belief that all children will have an overall means of communication that is known and utilized throughout the school day. We believe that such an environment is conducive to student learning and independence as the focus puts ‘Children, First.’ (QR 1.2, 3.1, 3.4, 4;1; DR 1a, 1b,1e, 2b, 2c,3b,3c,3d; Six Elements of the Capacity Framework for Great Schools) 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. School's Unique Characteristics, Initiatives and Strengths, Parental Partnerships ● Integration of the NYSED Next Generation Learning Standards (NGLS) and Alignment of Curriculum and Assessment Maps. Our school has integrated the Next Generation Learning Standards (NGLS) in ELA, Math, Science, and Social Studies within its revised Curriculum Map along with the results of teachers' survey of what teachers would like to include in that revised version of the Curriculum Map (C/Map). Other initiatives include the integration of the Essential Elements (EEs) of Dynamic Learning Maps (DLM), SANDI Items Numbers, and the various practices of the NGLS Core subjects. Based on the needs assessments, the organization revised its Curriculum, Instruction, and Assessment (CIA) team and began writing the P4K NGLS-aligned Curriculum Map in all core subjects. To this end, coaches successfully conducted Crosswalks for ELA, Math and Science, and dug deeper into understanding the revised standards to meet the diverse needs of our students. These professional learning experiences have been well received by all members who had to progressively turnkey the material to colleagues at their respective sites. The real work then began in writing the C/Map incorporating the Next Generation Learning Standards in core subjects, and the Blueprints for the Arts. The upshot today is that all new and veteran teachers have continually and enthusiastically been receiving, adopting and focusing on these new learning standards and the shifts by incorporating them into their lesson planning and instruction as they move to meet our students’ special needs. (QR 1.1,1.2, 2.2, 3.1, 3.4 4.1; DR 1a, 1e, 3c). ● P4K NGLS-aligned Curriculum Map Driven by the 3-E Instructional Model. P4K has progressively been taking major steps to incorporate the NGLS, at the same time integrating the STEAM focus into its Curriculum Map, its Units of Study, Teaching Points, Student learning Objectives (SLOs), resources and differentiated, modified interdisciplinary center – based activities for early to advanced learners; all aspects coherently aligned across and within grades. (QR1.1c; DR 1a, 1e, 3c). These concrete, hands-on activities are designed to address students’ individual learning strengths and therefore stimulate their thinking and making sense of what they are doing and learning (QR1.1b; DR1a, 1e, 3c) . Driven by the 3-E Model of Instruction, these actions and strategies have hugely impacted and enhanced teacher practice and student engagement at centers, and in student work products (QR 2.2;DR 3c, 3d). This correlation along with the Instructional shifts and the expectation of Rigor are well articulated into our C/Map Lesson plans and units of study. At our PLC Day 2 meeting, teachers have been and are continuing to examine student work in terms of the instructional shifts embedded in the NGLS. Teachers have consistently utilized these protocols to evaluate themselves and their student outcomes. The use of Depth of Knowledge (DOK) during instruction particularly allows teachers the opportunity to assess students for learning, and at the end of lesson provides teachers and other students a handle of how students have performed. Overall impact has been a tremendous help to teachers in 0  navigating the NGLS-aligned C /Map, incorporating the condensed instructional shifts, and integrating Danielson Rubric to register a huge impact on teacher practice and student outcomes. (QR1.1; DR1a). ● Both experienced and new teachers fully understand what an invaluable resource the NGLS-aligned C/Map plays in planning, preparing for and delivering instruction in their classrooms and ensuring educational equity, access and opportunity for all students including ENL students across the organization. (QR 1.1,1.2 2.2, 3.1, 3.4, 4.1; DR 1a, 1e, 3c, 3d) The NGLS-aligned Curriculum Map with its STEAM integration focus is simply laid out, user-friendly and serves as a formidable resource of instructional ideas and material to meet the diverse needs of all students.(QR 1.1,1.2, 3.1). The upshot of this integration has been observed in improved teacher planning (using P4K suggested Lesson Plan Template) , and presentation of engaging instruction to meet the diverse needs of their students. Teacher Preliminary Evaluation Results for 2017-2018 are as follows: 60% of teachers have had ' Effective’ rating, 36% ‘ Highly Effective’, and 4% Developing. ● P4K 3-E Instructional Model with High Correlation to the Three Principles of Universal Design For Learning (UDL). Our delivery of concrete, pictorial, hands-on differentiated and adapted activities are all driven by our researched – based 3-E Instructional Model of Engagement, Exploration (at trans-disciplinary centers) and Evaluation (of student various work products) at each center and end of period. (QR1.2 ; DR 1a). Our 3-E Model is highly aligned to the UDL Principles that allow teachers to utilize multiple entry points to present tasks, and permit students to express their work products in multiple ways and to share their work products with peers and adults. Teachers have been and are copiously utilizing the NGLS-aligned Curriculum /Map to create lesson plans that align to the Danielson Rubric (DR) all the time. (QR 1.2; DR 1e). All stakeholders uphold these beliefs of how children learn through the Continuum of Learning Principle shown below: From Concrete to Symbolic to Pictorial array of activities driven by our 3-E Instructional Model (pedagogy) within the Center – based Learning Approach: all aligned to the NGLS-aligned Curriculum Map. ● The P4K 6th Edition of 'Above and Beyond Cutting and Pasting' Graphic Illustration of Student intellectual Engagement serve as an invaluable resource for teachers in their lesson planning, and for all stakeholders to recognize and immortalize student learning. P4K has moved seamlessly from 'Beyond Cutting and Pasting' to 'Above and Beyond Cutting and Pasting!' ● Linking Professional Learning to Student outcomes. All faculty and staff upon return from any workshop must teach the new learning or some aspects of it to their students with evidence of student learning. ● PBIS Behavior Management System of Be A S.P.O.R.T. with its wide range of puppetry that represent Functional Qualities of Self-Control, Preparedness, Organized, and Try Hard with the values of Trust, Respect, Control, Persistence and Effort are all intimately embedded into our instructional day. P4K will be sharing and engaging all stakeholders in the new, 'Ready , Set , Respect' Initiative to counter Cyber-bulling in all its forms, and accept Cyber - responsibility for all. We have already adopted the 'Respect for All' throughout our seven sites. with much success for all. ● Parent Information of NGLS, Capacity Framework, Danielson Rubric (DR) and P4K S/CEP Goals, Instructional Focus and Systems & Structures. Parents across all six sites will be involved in many Professional Learning Opportunities including the Next Generation Learning Standards, STEAM Integrated Focus and other P4K Protocols with their implications for teachers, students, parents and other stakeholders in the new academic year. They also will have an insight into P4K instructional strategies (3-E Model within its Center-based Learning Approach), and support systems / structures that are in place to meet the demands of the NGLS. In addition, coaches will provide many learning 1  experiences for parents in Math/Science, (now designated STEAM) and ELA/Arts/Social Studies to assist children at home. The organization also provides relevant Math, ELA, Science and Speech/ Communication material during these occasions to enhance the home-school connection but more importantly, to help with students homework and learning. (QR 1.1a, 1.2;DR 2a, 4a) ● The school has established several community partnerships with NYU Optical and Dental Services, Family CookShop, Its Community Paradise Garden, and Swimming Partnership with our PS 224 at 710 Pool during the year, and The Astoria Swimming Pool in the Summer. P4K has created a strong ongoing Partnership with P396K. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. School Community PS 4 K is a Special Education School with 326 students from Pre-K through Grade 5, located at seven sites in Brooklyn. The school population comprises of 61.96 % Black, 24.23% Hispanic, 7.36 % White, 3.68% Asian, and 2.77 % others. Our Special Education PreK - Grade 5 student body includes 20.24 % ENL students , and 79.76% Special Education Students. The following populations of students with Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD), and other behavioral and developmental impairments represent: 6:1:1 ; 12:1:1 ; and 8:1:1. Boys account for 76.07% of the students enrolled, and girls account for 23.93%, representing a ratio of approximately 3:1. The overall average attendance for the school year 2017-2018 is 89.20%, steadily increasing over the years. ● School has recruited two ENL Teachers to address the special needs of our ever increasing ENL Population (20.24%). The school ensures Equity and full Access to all resources and services to meet the diverse needs of all ENL learners and SWDs. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. We have earned the following rating at the 2017-2018 Quality Review Performance Indicators: Instruction (1.1) - Well Developed; Pedagogy (1.2) -Well-Developed; Assessment (2.2)-Well Developed; Positive Learning Environment(1.4)-Well-Developed; High Expectations(3.4)-Well Developed; Leveraging Resources (1.3)-Well-Developed; Goals and Action Plans (3.1)-Well -Developed; Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1)-Proficient; Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2)-Well-Developed; Monitoring and Revising (5.1) Proficient The 2017-2018 Principal Performance Review Overall Rating = Highly Effective (98 score); Measures of Leadership Practice Rating = Highly Effective (98 score). In addition, the PPR for 2017-2018, shows that the two annual visits by our Superintendent and his Deputy in November and April of this academic year respectively, provided ratings of Highly Effective and Effective in the following Quality Review Performance Indicators: 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 2.2, 3.1, 3.4, 4.1 School Quality Guide shows that we have earned 4.2 on Rigorous Instruction; 3.99 on Collaborative Teachers; 3.33 on Effective Leadership; 4.06 on Strong Family-Community Ties (2016-2017) and 3.57 on Trust for 2017-2018. Other ratings NA because the QR ratings mentioned above have been submitted late for final integration summary by NYCDOE!. Major Instructional Focus: Notwithstanding these accomplishments by our students and school, it is imperative that we continue to target reading comprehension through our Instructional Focus: , that is, ' By focusing on Main Idea and Key Details across a variety of texts Read Aloud to, with and by students (RI.1, RL, & SL 3.2) using Multiple Entry and Exit Pathways, then student engagement and comprehension will increase. (Quality Review: 1.1,1.2,2.2,1.4,3.4 / Danielson Rubric (DR): 1a,1b, 1e,3b,3c,3d; Capacity Framework: Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment) The development of our 2017-2018 Instructional Focus (RI &RL, SL 3.2) shown above, has resulted from deep discussions of emerging ideas from multiple perspectives including the Curriculum, Instruction, and Assessment (CIA) 2  members. The team formulated the Instructional Focus that revolves around the Six Elements of the Capacity Framework driven by the NGLS-aligned Curriculum Map with Center-based activities, the Instructional Shifts and the results of the 2017-2018 S/CEP Goals that reveal a 16% increase ' in identifying the Main Idea and Key Details of a variety of texts, Read Aloud to, with and by students'. It is obvious that persisting with this focus will enhance reading, listening and speaking comprehension for all students. Narrative of Instructional Focus: P4K Belief System of How Children Learn Best incorporates a vision of exposing students with cognitively engaging, rigorous and differentiated Center-based Learning Experiences in ELA delivered through the 3-E Instructional Model. QR 1.1; 1.2 / DR 1a; 1e; 3c / CF: Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment, Collaborative Teachers. and Effective Leadership Given these opportunities with teacher collaboration, students will be able to demonstrate increased engagement and learning as they close the gap between what they can achieve with adult guidance and what they can do independently; all geared toward meeting the demands of the Next Generation Learning Standards (NGLS). QR 1.2; 2.2;4.2 / DR 3c; 3d; 4d; 4e / CF:Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment and Collaborative Teachers. Our organization expects that all students will achieve a Level 2 or higher in ELA ( RI & RL) by focusing on the Main Idea and Key Details of a variety of texts Read Aloud to, with, and by students. Progress monitoring will be done on a quarterly basis using the P4K teacher – created rubric on the End of Unit Assessments.( QR 2.2 /DR 1c;3d/ CF: Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment, Collaborative Teachers. and Effective Leadership) Other areas of focus: Improving the Operations and Algebraic skills of all students; Improving comprehension of our ENL Learners through Listening and Speaking skills ; Enhancing teacher effectiveness; Boosting Parental Engagement 3  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 75K004 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,SE Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 319 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance N/A N/A # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 85.0% % Attendance Rate 83.4% % Reduced Lunch 19.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.6% 25.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 6.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0% 5% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A N/A N/A 87.1% 0.0% 99.7% 61.8% 5.3% 1.6% 6 10% 8.2 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. This goal has been generated based on the following school data analyses and needs: 1. The 2017-2018 results of our Instructional focus in identifying Main Idea and Key Details in ELA show that students have made significant gains by exceeding the baseline average level of 2.0, representing a 16% increase. This outcome though acceptable does not include how students will perform in our updated NGLS-aligned C/Map with the integration of the new multiple standards documents. It is also the area where our students need more support and guidance to improve reading comprehension; hence our need to continue with this goal.  P4K Quality Review of 2017-2018 has shown that we have in place adequate support systems and structures to provide rigorous instruction as evident in our NGLS-aligned Curriculum Map with engaging and differentiated center-based activities driven by our 3-E Instructional Model that has earned us ‘Well Developed’ in eight (8) of the Quality Review Performance Indicators., and two (2) Proficient. 2. Based on the year-end survey for teachers on the NGLS –aligned Curriculum Maps in core subjects, there has been the expressed need to include more robust, challenging and engaging center-based learning experiences with designated instructional materials and procedures. Our CIA team has complied and accordingly has instituted changes in its revised version for 2018- 2019. that also include for the first time K-2 and 3-5 Grade bands in Math, Science and Social Studies , with attendant EEs and SANDI Item Numbers. With the advent of the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) and the Next Generation Learning Standards (NGLS) in ELA and Math, it has prompted the integration of these documents into our revised Curriculum Map (C/Map). The Social Studies had already been incorporated into our 2017-2018 Curriculum Map. The new changes in ELA and Math have also been added. For grades 3-5, the relevant Essential Elements (EEs) of Dynamic Learning Maps (DLM) have also been included into Page 1 of our map alongside the teaching points for ELA, Math, and Science. Accordingly, with the inclusion of new documents into the C/Map, we would need to continue to assess student performance in those adjusted areas in order to evaluate our sustained Instructional Focus of identifying Main Idea and Key Details of a variety of texts. Considering our students’ developmental needs and challenges, the P4K organization will continue supporting all students to meet and/or exceed the 2017-2018 NGLS- aligned Instructional Expectations in Literacy . Continuing to provide appropriate, modified, and engaging literacy learning experiences for our students will allow them to achieve post-secondary career readiness skills, independence and lifelong learning. The integration of our STEAM focus will further facilitate the attainment of this goal. Part 2 – Annual Goal 5  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. S/CEP #1: By June 2019, all p-5 students will earn a Level 2 and above as a result of participating in functional and engaging learning experiences outlined in the P4K NGLS-aligned Curriculum Map in the Core Subjects, by focusing on Main Idea and Key Details of a variety of texts, Read Aloud to, with, and by students. School-wide data collection assessment data will measure student performance at quarterly intervals, which will also serve as evidence to evaluate the NGLS - aligned Curriculum Map. (Capacity Framework for Great Schools Element: Rigorous Instruction) 6 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teachers/Multidisciplinary team to promote student reading comprehension Sept'18- May '19 APs, Coaches, Lead Teachers, Cluster Teachers, Classroom Teachers/Paraprofessionals/Related Service Providers, Parents Two ENL Teachers Sept.'18-May'19 APs, ENL Teachers, Coaches. Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will follow the P4K revised NGLS-aligned Curriculum Map with Units of Study, Teaching Points, and Student Learning Objectives driven by the 3-E Model of Engagement, Exploration, and Evaluation that provides Multiple Entry and Exit Points for rigorous, concrete and engaging activities to enhance student outcomes in all core subjects. Monthly Math /Science (now called STEAM) / and ELA/Social Studies Professional Learning Experiences Workshops will facilitate and train teachers in all activities for our children to experience success in the improving their comprehension of both fiction and non-fiction narratives through identifying the Main Idea and Key Details. The recruitment and retention of two teachers of ENL Learners will ensure that they employ appropriate instructional strategies for ENL students to enhance outcomes in this area. The ENL teachers will both receive Professional Development from D75 office and from P4K Instructional Coaches (Monthly basis) to build teacher capacity and ensure student success attaining this goal. Other strategies include in- class coaching, 7 and visits to sites every two weeks will further strengthen and support the initiative and goal. Teachers of all students will receive Lesson Plan Samples and Samples of Center-based Activities through use of scaffolding, graphic organizers, drama and play, art, inquiry/discovery, direct instruction, technology strategies in ELA with support from the ‘Push-in/Pull - out Models to support student outcomes. Both ENL Teachers/Multidisciplinary Team to promote student success APs Coaches, Lead Teachers, Cluster Teachers, Classroom Teachers/Paraprofessionals/Related Service providers and site teacher trainers Sept. ’18-May'19 Teachers use the Nine Adaptations to modify tasks and help students experience success at this goal. Coaches support at weekly PLCs meetings to assist and ensure teachers are on target in creating robust 'Make& Take' tasks Both ENL Teachers/Multidisciplinary Team to promote student success Sept.-’18– May'’19 APs Coaches, Lead Teachers, Cluster Teachers, Classroom Teachers/Paraprofessionals/Related Service providers and site teacher trainers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. P4K continues to foster an effective home-school partnership through our October ‘Meet & Greet’ opportunities whereby Principal and APs disseminate relevant data and expectations on all educational measures and reforms. Parents at each site become aware of the P4K Expectations and all of our S/CEP Goals for the year; and how to help their children at home in improving reading comprehension through our Instructional Focus of Reading Aloud to, with and by students in all core subjects (RI &RL) through multiple entry and exit pathways. During the school year coaches/Related Service Providers provide parents with relevant materials and training in all core subject activities to help parents work with their children at home to improve student achievement. At these quarterly sessions and workshops, coaches provide hands-on activities as they share information of the new reform measures from the State and City about new or modified standards, curricular materials, and assessment tools to show how the children are performing and progressing toward meeting this goal. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Instructional Resources: Curriculum Map/ Assessment Maps with Units of Study, 8  Human Resources: Principal, APs, Coaches, Lead Teachers, ENL Teachers, Classroom Teachers, Paraprofessionals, and Related Service Providers Schedule Adjustments : Common Preps, Scheduled Days for Professional Development / Learning, Designated Professional Learning Communities (PLCs) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-Point Benchmark: By the end of February 2019, 50 % of all p-5 students will achieve a score of Level 2 or above as a result of participating in engaging learning experiences outlined in the P4K NGLS-aligned Curriculum Map in the Core Subjects, as measured by quarterly assessment data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Instrument of Measure: The data collected will be used by the Administration and the School leadership team to monitor student performance / progress in meeting this goal, using the P4K Grading Scale: Performance Levels 1-4 with Rubric. The Mid Point Data Measure will determine whether school should modify its goal. ( Ongoing formative assessments within ongoing classroom instruction will provide insights as to how students are progressing towards meeting the goal) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1. Our last S/CEP goal has been achieved with all K-5 ENL students demonstrating the following performance level as we offer robust, differentiated, challenging and engaging experiences for our ENL learners: The End of year data shows that ENL students have performed well by evidencing a 66% increase in Listening Experiences; 67% increase in Speaking; and sustaining an 23% overall average in identifying Main Idea & Key Details. P4K will continue to retain this ENL goal as we appear to be receiving growing numbers of early learners; and this area is of considerable need for all learners.  Under the Quality Review Performance Indicator of 2018-2019 - High Expectations, our school has earned ‘Well Developed’ that supports the Capacity Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment. 2. Nothwithstanding these performances, it is important for the organization to continue with this goal as the Rubric for NYSESLAT has changed which will also impact our teacher-created rubric. Additionally, P4K School Leadership has recognized the increase in the number of ENL students in attendance that has significantly impacted the need to have our students participate in the Listening and Speaking Modalities of NYSESLAT. These modalities have been recognized as the neediest for our children based on the 2017-2018 NYSESLAT results. Accordingly, P4K has generated a Listening and Speaking Modality Program based on NYSESLAT to assess student performance and growth as measured by P4K teacher-created rubric. Because of the increasing numbers of ENL students at seven sites, there has been an urgent need to replace one of the current ENL teachers to cope with increasing numbers and to ensure we provide adequate targeted services and resources. The school espouses a vision and a belief system of how children learn best by providing opportunities for rigorous and differentiated center -based activities where all children can learn within an interdisciplinary academic approach that supports trust and respect for one another and where children feel safe, without any fear of communicating their thinking, requests, and needs among adults and peers. Our adoption of the ' Respect for All' and the 'Ready, Set , Respect ' Initiatives will further 0  enhance our strong supportive environment with equality and access to all resources and services for all students. Our P4K systems and structures all address and support the Capacity Framework for Great Schools Element of Supportive Environment Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. S/CEP Goal #2: By June 2019, all K-5 students with English as a New Language (ENL) will achieve a Level 2 or higher, through the focus of identifying Main Idea and Key Details in engaging Listening and Speaking Learning Experiences from a variety of texts, Read Aloud to, with and by students as measured by NYSESLAT. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers receive training to understand the P4K NGLS-aligned Curriculum Map with Units of Study, Teaching Points, and Student Learning Objectives to improve learning of our ENL students during Sept. Orientation Day PD; Election Day PD, and throughout the year. All ENL Sept' 18 & Nov'18 Teachers /ClassroomTeachers/ RSPs P4K Professional Learning Communities (PLCs) Protocols - Day 1 and Day 2 with Tracking Log for Professional Collaboration; all geared to improve teacher capacity to successfully improve the achievement of ENL Students. Weekly meetings for both Day 1 and Day 2 throughout the year All Teachers including ENL Sept. '18-May'19 District 75 Personnel, and SANDI/FAST Programmers for Administrators, Lead Teachers, and Coaches, Designated Lead Teachers Speech Providers and Classroom Teachers and Paraprofessionals, Data Specialist District 75 Personnel, and SANDI/FAST Programmers for Administrators, Lead Teachers, and Coaches, Designated Lead Teachers Speech Providers and Classroom Teachers and Paraprofessionals, Data Specialist 2  Professional Development for ENL teachers in the elements of the Listening and Speaking Framework for students at specific times outlined ENL teachers Sept. '18-May'19 ENL teachers begin recruiting ENL Parents for Title 111 Program offered on Saturdays to help parents and children work on activities and projects ENL Parents/ Children Sept. '18-May'19 P4K teachers and ENL teachers will make effective use of the following strategies to ensure student success in classrooms, and in the P4K modified Tests in Listening and Speaking: Classroom Teachers, and Related Service Providers Sept.'18- June'19 ● Scaffolding, use of graphic organizers, visuals, media, peer help, home language help, and other communication strategies ● Heterogeneous grouping ● Activating prior knowledge ● Speaking English slowly and with visual or gestures District 75 Personnel, and SANDI/FAST Programmers for Administrators, Lead Teachers, and Coaches, Designated Lead Teachers Speech Providers and Classroom Teachers and Paraprofessionals, Data Specialist District 75 Personnel, and SANDI/FAST Programmers for Administrators, Lead Teachers, and Coaches, Designated Lead Teachers Speech Providers and Classroom Teachers and Paraprofessionals, Data Specialist ENL Teachers, Classroom Teachers, Speech / Communication Specialists, Designated Lead Teachers, Coaches, and Data Specialists 3 ● Use of Vocabulary Integrating content and language in instruction All stakeholders embrace our Belief System of How Children Learn Best. Provide opportunities for all stakeholders to use our P4K PBIS – Be A S.P.O.R.T. common language of trust, respect, and understanding of ENL students; their backgrounds, traditions, language etc., and to enable them to feel comfortable with one another in the classrooms, hallways, cafeteria, gardening, swimming, and buses; having High Expectations for all students Students, teachers and aides, parents and families Sept‘18 – June ‘19 ENL Teachers, Classroom Teachers, Speech / Communication Specialists, Designated Lead Teachers, Coaches, and Data Specialists 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. All Parents invited to ‘Meet & Greet’ opportunities at each site to make them fully aware of the P4K Expectations around providing ENL support to students using the ' Push-in Integrated Model' and 'Pull Out' Model'. ● P4K shares information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand and feel comfortable. Parents become aware of how to ensure they have equal access and equity to all services and resources for their needy children Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional Development: Designated ENL Teachers, and Data Specialist provide appropriate training in ENL Assessments, Curriculum Map, and Instructional Strategies for all teachers to build capacity and improve ENL students learning Instructional Resources -Let’s Begin , Land of the Letter People, Words Their Way, Equals and Everyday Math, Foss Science with appropriate trade books in native language to foster English learning. P4K Systems of Communication with ENL Parents and other Stakeholders through newsletters, assemblies, meetings, and daily communication of all ENL reforms, requirements and expectations. Schedule Adjustments: ENL teachers conduct 'Push-In ' and ' Pull-Out ' Models to enhance language development and academic learning. P4K System of Behavior Management – PBIS and ‘BE A S.P.O.R.T.’ Strategy with Puppetry icons permeated throughout the instructional day Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring 4  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-Point Benchmark : By end of February 2019, 50% of K-5 students with English as a New Language (ENL) will achieve a Level 2 or higher, through the focus of identifying Main Idea and Key Details in engaging Listening and Speaking Learning Experiences from a variety of texts, Read Aloud to, with, and by students. As measured by quarterly listening and speaking assessment data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Instrument of Measure: The Quarterly Listening and Speaking Assessments will be used by the Administration and the School Leadership Team (SLT) to monitor student performance and progress, using the Grading Scale: Performance Levels 1-5. Data will determine whether school is meeting this goal or whether there is need for adjustment of the goal. ( Ongoing formative assessments within ongoing classroom instruction will provide insights as to how students are progressing towards meeting the goal) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Our Preliminary End of Year Results have shown that 60 % of teachers have earned ‘Effective’ rating; 36% ‘Highly Effective’, (96% total), while 4% are at 'Developing' Stage. This area of teacher quality is essential for school organization to ensure teachers have the required content knowledge, instructional strategies and appropriate resources to enhance their craft; hence our need to retain this goal for another year. Our Professional Learning Communities (PLCs) allow teachers to collaboratively meet and have positive conversations about their craft. Teachers have been involved in a wide spectrum of 'Make & Take' center-based activities as they meet at the PLCs Day 1 meeting as per the dictates of the NGLS-aligned Curriculum Map with focus on creating and designing activities that target IEP Skill Clusters especially on the Main Idea and Key details to improve reading comprehension of all children. Professional Learning Communities (PLCs) Day 2 meeting allows teachers to collaboratively meet weekly to examine and analyze student work focusing on the Main Idea and Key Details in core subjects and to assist struggling students to improve performance. The net change in student work is captured in the P4K Tracking Log . 2. The need to create and design engaging center- based learning activities for diverse instructional groups is increasingly demanding to adopt and adapt a vast spectrum of instructional strategies that will foster student engagement, impact student outcomes and improve teacher effectiveness. Teacher collaborate at their PLCs meetings to design and create engaging differentiated hands-on activities on a Weekly basis for their struggling and regular students Therefore, P4K will respond to and meet the NYCDOE Capacity Framework for Great Schools Element of Collaborative Teachers, and P4K Expectations through this goal. P4K Instructional Focus will help to strengthen and improve teacher effectiveness that will show evidence of progress teachers are making toward achieving their own professional goals generated from Advance , and which will increasingly impact student learning outcomes through increased student engagement and learning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. S/CEP Goal #3: By June 2019, all teachers will earn Highly Effective / Effective in 3C for increased teacher effectiveness and improved student learning, as measured by Advance. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Coaches assist teachers in unwrapping and utilizing the revised P4K NGLS-aligned Curriculum Map with Units of Study, Modules, Themes and Teaching points toward meeting this goal of improving teacher effectiveness and student engagement, (DR:3c). The Sept. Orientation Day PD, weekly PLCs meetings, in-class support at each site on a 3-week cycle, Monthly ELA & STEAM meetings are established protocols, Structures and Systems that are designed to promote teacher effectiveness through creation of engaging, hands-0n, differentiated, and robust learning experiences for all students (3C). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? District 75 PD, Lead Teachers, and Coaches, Designated Lead Teachers Data Specialist All Teachers Sept‘18-May'19 Professional Learning Communities (PLCs): Teachers use the NGLS-aligned C/Map and Lesson Templates to create lesson plans aligned to the Danielson Rubric all the time, and for all centers, using the 3-E Instructional Model to plan and deliver engaging, concrete, pictorial, hands-on differentiated and adapted activities to increase student engagement. (DR:1a,1e). Frequency: PLCs weekly meetings Teachers receive Internal and external Professional Development and follow-up workshops that allow them to gain a deep understanding of the Danielson Framework (DR) for evaluation of teacher effectiveness in conjunction with our NGLS-aligned Curriculum Map : Frequency: (Election DayFaculty/Instructional meetings.), and throughout the year, as they inform instruction throughout the year All Teachers Oct'18-May'19 District 75 PD, Lead Teachers, and Coaches, Designated Lead Teachers Data Specialist All Teachers Sept. Orientation Day/ Election Day/Oct '18-May'19 District 75 PD, Lead Teachers, and Coaches, Designated Lead Teachers Data Specialist 7  All Teachers October‘18- May ‘19 All Teachers/ Sept'18 - June'19 RSPs District 75 PD, Lead Teachers, and Coaches, Designated Lead Teachers Data Specialist Principal, APs, Coaches, Lead Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Classroom Teachers / RSPs Teachers establish professional goals in alignment with Components 1a, 1e, 1d, 2b, 2c, 3b,3c, 3d to improve their own professional career, teacher effectiveness and student achievement as students excel in identifying Main Idea and Key Details of a variety of texts (RI&RL) during Faculty/Instructional meetings throughout the year Teachers create, use, and deliver the C/Map concrete, pictorial, hands-on differentiated and adapted Center -based activities through our researched – based 3-E Instructional Model of Engagement, Exploration (at interdisciplinary/trans-disciplinary centers) and Evaluation (of student various work products) at each center and end of period. Frequency: daily evaluation of student performance and progress. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. P4K shares its values, expectations and belief for student engagement and learning through our P4K Belief System of How Children Learn Best. To continue to expand our trusting relationships with parents, we believe in sharing the ratings of teachers upon parental request. School shares information at SLTs monthly meetings, "Meet & Greet' in October/November, PTCs, Assemblies and Celebrations on a monthly basis. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Instructional Resources: Administration and Coaches provide workshops . All teachers provided with NYCDOE /P4K Units Of Study/ teaching points, along withProtocols. Human Resources: School Coaches and District Personnel provide Informational workshops Principals and APs conduct Teacher Observations for S/CEP Baseline data and Teacher Evaluation using Advance, with subsequent Observations for quarterly assessment to monitor goal attainment MOSL committee Schedule Adjustments: Professional Learning Communities (PLCs) teams meet on a weekly basis Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 8  X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid Point Benchmark: By February 2019, 50% of teachers will earn Highly Effective / Effective in 3C for increased teacher effectiveness and improved student learning, as measured by Advance. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Instrument of Measure: The administration will monitor teacher performance through teacher observations taken at quarterly periods, using Advance Performance Indicators (3C and other relevant indicators) to determine progress in attaining Highly Effective/Effective ratings across the HEDI Continuum of Advance. (Teacher Observations will be taken quarterly after Baseline is established in October through the collection and analysis of data with feedback via WalkThroughs, Informal and Formal Classroom Observations on other Advance Rubric which will provide additional qualitative supporting evidence). Both kinds of data/evidence will help administration and SLT to assess teacher efficacy progress in meeting this goal and whether to alter this goal Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based off of the 2017-18 Quality Review, it was evident that our school community engages in structured professional collaborations on teams using an inquiry approach that promotes shared leadership and focuses on improved student learning. The Quality Review outlines our need to observe teachers using the Danielson Framework for Teaching along with the analysis of learning outcomes to elevate school-wide instructional practices and implement strategies that promote professional growth and reflection, as this was our area of focus. Within our organization, teachers receive feedback from school leaders on their instructional practices through the observation process. Observation reports, formal and informal, capture practices related to the Danielson Framework for Teaching and offer commendations and recommendations for strategies to improve. With the use of Teachboost it allows us to provide feedback as well as online resources specific to the domains of Danielson. School leaders include low-inference evidence aligned to key components of questioning, engaging students in learning, and assessing to include analysis of student work. To support new teachers, school leaders partner them with experienced buddy teachers. School leaders at each site coordinate and keep logs of the observation process. Teachers are provided with verbal feedback or written comments after all informal classroom visits. In addition staff will resources from Teachboost that mentors/coaches can review and help implement as part of the feedback process. Administrators also get an opportunity to meet with Teachers to identify a specific goal to work on for the year and can track progress and support within Teachboost where the teachers can keep track as well. The use of effective feedback tools and a system to help implement and track progress should address alignining observations to professional goals. As noted in our 2017-18 Quality Review feedback, while feedback consistently supports school wide expectations for instruction and assessment, and teachers set goals during their instructional planning conferences, the observations do not consistently reflect feedback aligned to their professional goals Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through effective feedback, aligned to professional goals, 15% of teachers will improve their overall rating as measured by ADVANCE and Teachboost Data. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  School leaders at all sites norm their ratings by jointly conducting observations and determining the essential policies that must be included in all observations, such as adherence to the 3-E model of instruction and alignment to the school wide curriculum map. After the visit, the school leaders examine the lesson plan and review the quality of the student work produced. They compare their individual ratings and agree on the normed rating. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administration Principal Sept 2018 - June 2019 Implementation and usage of the Teachboost system by all administrators and teachers in order to track teacher progress toward meeting their professional goals and align feedback directly to this progress. Administration Sept 2018 - June 2019 Principal Teachers AP's Professional Development will be provided on an ongoing basis to ensure quality feedback and actionable next steps are provided to move teachers along the continuum. Administration Sept 2018 - June 2019 Principal Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. P4K continues to foster an effective home-school partnership through our October ‘Meet & Greet’ opportunities whereby Principal and APs disseminate relevant data and expectations on all new educational measures and expectations. Parents at each site become aware of the P4K Expectations and all of our S/CEP Goals for the year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1  Instructional Resources: Teachboost System Human Resources: JESA - Advance Coaching, Principal Schedule Adjustments: Administrative cabinet and professional learning Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid Point Benchmark: By the end of February 2019, P4K administration will monitor ADVANCE data to determine if the targeted 5% increase over baseline data from Teachboost has been met, or whether there is a need for adjustment of the goal Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Instrument of Measure: ADVANCE and Teachboost Data reports directly aligned to teacher professional goals will be collected throughout the year and analyzed at quarterly intervals to determine if progress is being made towards meeting the goal. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Parent attendance at school events and meetings last school year represented a modest achievement. End of year data reveals a total of 1,560 parental visits made from Sept .‘17 to June. ‘18, reflecting a 11% increase from baseline data. P4K has been and is committed to enhancing parent immersion and engagement in school programs, events and various meetings to sustain and promote student achievement. P4K has had a significant increase in ENL students representing 20.24% of our school population; hence, it is a subgroup that the school has set as a priority, focusing on promoting student achievement. Our Title 111 Initiative is one way to boost our communication and support for parents and their children in garnering varied resources to facilitate Language improvement and student achievement. 2. We believe that parent support is vital to student success, second only to teacher quality. Therefore it behooves us as a strong school community to encourage and expand our school-parent – community partnerships even more as we embrace the elements captured in the Chancellor’s Capacity Framework for Great Schools Element of Strong Family-Community Ties for meeting student independence, lifelong learning and the demands of college and career readiness. Our co-curricular community Projects and Programs in Gardening and Swimming will foster the social Interaction and communication among our parents, students and teachers Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. S/CEP Goal # 5: By June 2019, P4K family-community partnerships will improve by 10% - end data (baseline), as evidenced by increased parent attendance and engagement at various school - wide meetings and events such as our newly implemented parent support groups and individualized communication form. Progress will be monitored at quarterly intervals through analysis of parent sign - in sheets and other relevant artifacts. (Capacity Framework for Great Schools Element: Strong Family-Community Ties) 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Parents attend ‘Meet & Greet’ opportunities at each site to make them fully aware of the P4K Teaching and Learning Expectations in alignment with The NYCDOE Instructional Expectations, The Next Generation Learning Standards (NGLS) and the Chancellor’s Capacity Framework for Great Schools and to improve their participation. Parent Classroom Newsletters for updates of curricular activities, upcoming events, IEP Meetings, Parent Teacher Conferences, and assemblies and celebrations to inform parents and encourage their participation in celebrating their children’s achievement. Teachers maintain daily and monthly data of student performance and progress to inform parents. Parents receive ongoing training and materials in core subjects of literacy, math, science, Social Studies and The Arts to help parents work with their children at home to practice and reinforce academic and behavioral skills Parent Support Group will engage families in discussions with school leadership surrounding social-emotional issues and at home support. Individualized Parent Communication Form will allow parents to receive specific and relevant daily information about their child's education, tailored to their needs. Parents Engage in the 'Respect for All' and the 'Ready , Set, Respect ' Initiatives during the year as well as in February; the latter to help students develop Cyber-Responsibility and practice Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Principal, APs, Coaches, Lead Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Classroom Teachers, Related Service Providers, and Counselors. Parents and Guardians Oct’ 18 – Nov'18 Sept'18.-June ' 19 Sept'18-June'19 Sept'18-June'19 4 Meetings of Related Service Providers and Parents on how to integrate strategies into the home, based on students' IEPs. All Parents and Guardians Sept’18– June’ 19 Title III Saturday Workshops open for parents (ENL) and their children to work collaboratively to increase student achievement. Parents encouraged to participate in school wide events, celebrations, conferences, professional development, SLT, PA and co-extracurricular activities such as Field Day Physical Education Activities, Gardening and Swimming Activities all geared to increase participation and attendance. All Parents and Guardians April'19-June'19 Sept’18 – June’ 19 All stakeholders embrace our Belief System of How Children Learn Best, providing opportunities for all stakeholders to use Our P4K PBIS – Be A S.P.O.R.T common language of trust, respect, and understanding of others; their backgrounds, traditions, language etc., and to enable them to feel comfortable with one another in the classrooms, hallways, cafeteria gardening swimming, and buses. All Stakeholders Sept’18 – June’ 19 Principal, APs, Coaches, Lead Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Classroom Teachers, Related Service Providers, and Counselors. Principal, APs, lead teachers, Parent Coordinator, Classroom Teachers, Related Service providers, and Counselors Principal, APs, Coaches, Lead Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Classroom Teachers, Related Service Providers, and Counselors 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Our Swimming Partnerships with P224 @710 during the year, and the Astoria Pool in the summer serve our fragile students very well because they enhance the development of fine and gross motor skills in our children among other benefits. Our Paradise Community Garden has just been restored and will be re-commissioned this academic year to serve our children with many opportunities to know, learn and develop skills about real world life situations. Our efforts are now being geared toward establishing parent partnerships to volunteer and become part of these projects and year- long endeavors. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources : Principal, APs, Coaches, Parent Coordinator, teachers , Related Service Providers and Family Aides provide workshops and requested help for parents with special needs Instructional Resources : Administration and Coaches provide workshops with P4K Teaching and Learning The P4K Way, the Six Elements Framework for Great Schools, the Next Generation Learning Standards (NGLS), the P4K Instructional Focus ● Parent Coordinator, Coaches and Principal/APs provide workshops on the Next Generation Learning Standards (NGLS) 5  ● Principal and APs provide informational Sessions on the Current Teacher Evaluation System ( Advance) ● P4K coaches, lead teachers and administration demonstrate components of P4K Curriculum /Assessment Maps and P4K Thumb Drive Resources for information and to increase attendance ● Parents receive information of our S/CEP goals, and NYCDOE /P4K Units Of Study/Teaching Points, along with The Nine Adaptations Protocol, NYSAA DLM, SANDI/FAST to appraise them of implications on P4K school community Schedule Adjustments: Parents are informed regularly of impending Meetings, Events, PTCs, Assemblies and School Projects involving parents who must adjust their schedules to attend Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid Point Benchmark: By the end of February 2019, P4K administration will monitor parent attendance data on a quarterly basis to determine if the targeted 5% increase over baseline data of attendance at Conferences/Assemblies/School Visits has been met, or whether there is a need for adjustment of the goal Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Instrument of Measure: Parent Attendance data at school visits / conferences / assemblies, and other artifacts will be collected throughout the year at all seven sites, and analyzed at quarterly intervals to determine if progress is being made towards meeting the goal. ( Ongoing formative assessments within ongoing classroom instruction will provide insights as to how students are progressing towards meeting the goal) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group, dyads, triads, 1 - 1 - In- class push- in to facilitate instruction and behavior When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) - During the Instructional day for individual and/or group - During the day for One-on-One - Push in / Pull – out Models Pull out for therapeutic communication and speech Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) - Barriers to improved student performance - Additional instruction to supplement regular instruction - Guidance and counseling Services to improve attendance for SWDs and Students of ENL Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Programs: - Balanced Literacy, Words their way, Let’s Begin, Land of the Letter People with adaptations aligned to the P4K NGLS-aligned Curriculum Map; Gardening, Swimming, Reading A-Z, BrainPop, Discovery Education Strategies: - Individual and/or group for Hands-on concrete, symbolic , pictorial Center-based -Learning activities driven by the 3-E model using appropriate manipulatives, with visual/ physical/ verbal/ and AAC devices and support fromour revised NGLS- aligned Curriculum Map 7 Small group, dyads, triads,1-1, - During the Instructional day for individual and/or group -In- class push- in to facilitate instruction and behavior - During the day for One-on-One -Push in / Pull –out Models Pull out for therapeutic communication and speech Small group, dyads, triads,1-1 -In- class push- in to facilitate instruction and behavior During the Instructional day for individual and/or group - During the day for One-on-One -Push in / Pull – out Models Pull out for therapeutic communication and speech Mathematics - Barriers to improved student performance - Additional instruction to supplement regular instruction - Guidance and counseling Services to improve attendance for SWDs and students of ENL Science - Barriers to improved student performance - Additional instruction to supplement regular instruction Programs:Math Games, Math Equals, P4K NGLS Curriculum Map; Gardening, Swimming, Reading A-Z, BrainPop, Discovery Education Strategies: - Individual and/or group for Hands-on concrete, symbolic , pictorial Center-based Learning Approach using the 3-E model Concrete, Hands-on and appropriate manipulatives, with visual/ physical/ verbal/ and AAC devices Programs: Foss Science Kits, P4K NGLS-alignedCurriculum Map; Gardening, Swimming, Vizzle, BrainPop, Discovery Education - Guidance and counseling Strategies: Services to improve attendance for SWDs and students of ENL -Individual and/or group for Hands-on concrete, symbolic , pictorial Center-based Learning Approach using the 3-E model Concrete, Hands-on and appropriate manipulatives, with visual/ physical/ verbal/ and AAC devices 8  Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) - Barriers to improved student performance - Additional instruction to supplement regular instruction - Guidance and counseling Services to improve attendance for SWDs and students of ENL - Barriers to improved student performance - Additional instruction to supplement regular instruction - Guidance and counseling Services to improve attendance for SWDs and Students of ENL Programs : P4K NGLS Curriculum Map; Gardening, Swimming, Vizzle, BrainPop, Discovery Education Small group, dyads, triads,1-1 - In- class push- in to facilitate instruction and behavior - During the Instructional day for individual and/or group - During the day for One-on-One Strategies: -Individual and/or group for Hands-on concrete, symbolic , pictorial Center-based Learning Approach using the 3-E model Concrete, Hands-on and appropriate manipulatives, with visual/ physical/ verbal/ and AAC devices Strategies : Individual and/or group for Hands-on concrete, symbolic , pictorial Center-based Learning Approach using the 3-E model Concrete, Hands-on and appropriate manipulatives, with visual/ physical/ verbal/ and AAC devices -Push in / Pull – out Models Pull out for therapeutic communication and speech Small group, dyads, triads,1-1 - In- class push- in to facilitate instruction and behavior During the Instructional day for individual and/or group - During the day for One-on-One -Push in / Pull –out Models Pull out for therapeutic communication and speech 9  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 19 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 0  We plan on purchasing school uniforms, book-bags, clothing, toiletries, attendance incentives, after-school activities and Positive Behavior Incentives to name a few. Students will have access to the same public education and services that are available to permanently housed students and are included in all aspects of our school learning environment. Students receive services based on their IEPs. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. We received $16,778.00 1  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 2  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 0 0 0 0 0 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 3  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 4  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 75K004, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. 75K004 will support parents and families of Title I ( STU) students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 5  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s programming. This information will be maintained by the school. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; 6  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct a Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) 75K004 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 7  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 8  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; 9  ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 0  1  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: As research reflects, "The Afterschool Alliance Programs Study found that regular participation in high-quality afterschool programs are helping all students, including English Language Learners (ELLs) reach their full potential." In addition, Afterschool programs are essential because they support language acquisition, social emotional well-being and engage students' families; that schools alone are challenged with providing ELLs (Afterschool Alliance, 2017). Afterschool ELL programs help parents understand the demands of US schools and equip them with skills to be their child's teacher and advocate. Afterschool programs also assist students who are struggling in reading, math, and acquisition of the English language. They provide supplemental supports outside the classroom and in varied mediums. Recent research supports the benefits of afterschool programs for ELLs. For instance, an afterschool known as La Prensa Libre de Simpson Street found that 80 percent of the students showed improvement in school attendance and 90 percent new to the program increased their literacy skills. Also, another afterschool program called ourBRIDGE for KIDS noted a 95 percent improvement in students engagement and performance in school by their teachers ( Afterschool Alliance 2017). Therefore, by customizing afterschool programs for ELLs with disabilities, they will enhance their language acquisition skills with assistance of technology and differentiated instruction tailored to their needs. With this in mind, we will start our Title III Saturday Program, named "Language & Literacy," for ELLs and their families. The program will run for six weeks from March to April 2019. Eighteen special needs ELL students (grades K-5) with 2 teachers will participate in our Saturday Title III program where we are seeking to improve their language, literacy, and communication skills, while incorporating a technology component as well. They will be grouped according to their class ratio (12:1:1 and 6:1:1 from various sites) and grade level, making sure that the groups are consistent with IEP mandates. We believe that special needs students will benefit most from this Title III program, which will be delivered in English, to build language fluency. The participants were chosen based on the SANDI (Student Assessment Needs Determination Inventory), the P4K baseline assessment in listening & speaking, as well as the NYSITELL/NYSESLAT scores in kindergarten through fifth grade. The instructional staff will be comprised of one fully certified ENL teacher and one fully certified Special Education teacher, who is bilingual in Spanish and has an expertise in technology. There will be three bilingual paraprofessionals who speak Haitian-Creole and Spanish. They will be involved in providing Title III instructional and parental activities. The program will build language and communication as families work side by side with students and instructors, creating home schedules, adapted books, hands-on experiences in Cookshop, and expanding on students' activities in daily living (ADL) skills. Computer technology and an interactive Triumph Board will aid in the implementation of these activities. Instruction will be provided in English with home language support from the bilingual Title III staff. The students targeted for participation in the Saturday academy have been identified as struggling readers with severe disabilities. They have been unable to grasp phonemic awareness in the construct of the English language. The program aims to enhance reading comprehension, 3  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information inside and outside of the classroom (i.e. technology or environmental awareness), in order for ELLs to develop oral language proficiency. During the Saturday academy, ELLs will be provided with ample opportunities to practice language skills in social and cultural settings. The Saturday Title III Program “Language & Literacy,” has run successfully for nine consecutive years. It is designed for ELL parents and children with special needs to develop literacy skills through the use of hands-on activities, adaptive technology, and computer software. The need for a supplemental program within the P4K organization continues to grow as the English Language Learner population is steadily increasing. This coming year, the Title III teachers will focus on hands-on science activities (animal habitats and plant diversity) and Cookshop skills with the parents and students that support P4K's curriculum. For instance, volunteer guest speakers will facilitate how to introduce science at home in a way that supports the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) curriculum. Also, there will be speech, occupational therapy, and Cookshop training sessions. The materials and supplies will be purchased and/or made using technology (Boardmaker software) to assist parents in building functional communication tools that will benefit their children. P4K's ENL program supports the school's curriculum which is aligned to the CCLS. The curriculum is designed and adapted to assist ELLs in the attainment of English Language Proficiency and academic achievement. The ENL teacher utilizes ENL methodologies and strategies for ELL students who participate in NYSESLAT testing. Some of these methodologies include Total Physical Response (TPR), Language Experience Approach (LEA), the Natural Approach, Community Language Learning (CLL), Think-Pair-Share (TPS). This also includes other strategies such as differentiated instruction, adaptation of materials to accommodate visual learners, utilization of augmentative and alternative communication (AAC) devices. In addition to the ENL strategies listed, teachers will also provide active modeling, graphic organizers, semantic webs, and role-playing. To meet our diverse cognitive learning levels, P4K will also use multiple entry and exit points of learning inclusive of manipulatives, visual supports, augmentative communication, and technology software accommodations. P4K’s administration ensures that ELL students receive the mandated services as per CR Part 154, and the linguistic diversity in our school community also drives the selection of programs that meet students' needs. The school's Language Allocation Policy (LAP) serves as the guiding principle for our ENL program. Within the LAP, P4K identifies its English Language Learners and addresses their needs, goals and objectives for language acquisition as well as the conceptual development of our ELL community. The "Language & Literacy" program will run for six Saturdays, from 8am to 1pm beginning in March and ending in April 2019. During the Title III workshop series, parents and students will be provided with direct instruction and the opportunity to practice and implement newly acquired English language skills. Additionally, the ELL students' IEP goals will be addressed, and support staffing will remain in line with IEP mandates. Instruction will be delivered in a differentiated model. The program's goal is to provide opportunities to utilize newly acquired language skills and technology while engaging in literature as well as social activities. The Saturday academy will be an opportunity to practice, share, and expand English language skills. All ELL parents will be invited to fully participate and work alongside their children in the Saturday workshop series. These parents will receive direct instruction from the ENL and Technology instructors in a group setting, with each instructor taking a segment of the 4  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information morning. The morning will be scheduled so that students and parents will receive direct instruction from both teachers. Materials will include technological software to assist in second language acquisition during learning, bookmaking, preparing individualized schedules, and adaptive materials to move students along the Language-learning continuum. Reading A-Z licenses will be donated by the ENL instructor to increase fluency and practice of the English language. Metrocards will be provided to parents to assist them in traveling to and from the program. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: P4K's Saturday academy will use a textbook titled, Reading Problems: Assessment and Teaching Strategies (7th ed.). Boston: Pearson (2014) by Caldwell and Lerner, for professional staff development. The staff will discuss and utilize multiple approaches to teaching students with reading problems using practical strategies in collecting a baseline of reading skills, as discussed in the textbook. We will utilize the students' baseline data to assist in formulating individualized instruction for various learning styles. In addition, the ENL teacher will facilitate training for the instructional staff on how to interpret the baseline data as well as evaluate reading skills. The Assistant Principal will facilitate interpreting data and designing instruction alongside the teaching staff. The AP will also give feedback to proposed lessons and activities which will be presented to families. During the 2018-19 school year, we are going to utilize historical assessment data from the previous school year's NYSESLAT (2017-2018) testing to inform instruction. This will be supported by the textbook, Reading Assessment and Development, and the P4K ENL assessment. There will be six one-hour professional development sessions. The participants will be one Assistant Principal, one ENL teacher, one Special Education/Technology teacher who is fluent in Spanish and English, and the three bilingual paraprofessionals. The initial professional development, Session 1, will serve as an introduction to the program and will be held from 3:30- 4:30 pm on the Friday before the program begins. The remainder of the professional development sessions will be held at am 7-8am on Saturday mornings from March to April 2019. Sessions 2 and 3 will cover the functional use of technology and software. Sessions 4 and 5 will train staff on the use of the Boardmaker program to create schedules and social stories for students. Session 6 will cover Triumph Board techniques and activities. The final session, will be used for creating adapted books and personal communication systems for our ELLs with severe disabilities. It is crucial for all staff to be trained in these areas to facilitate language, literacy, and technology support. The special education teacher will be responsible for providing professional development to all staff at the Saturday academy in regards to technology. It is important for all members to be 5  Part C: Professional Development trained in the programs that will be utilized, and have an opportunity to practice technology skills. This training will be facilitated through the utilization of a Triumph Board, to navigate the aforementioned programs, along with laptops in more individualized sessions. The ENL teacher will deliver expanded and ongoing professional development and implementation of ENL strategies and methodologies. In addition, the ENL instructor will model activities and ENL strategies that will be used during the Title III instructional program. The Language & Literacy Program promises to be a language enrichment series that allows English Language Learners to participate in adapted bookmaking, adapted poetry, “Make and Take,” student schedules, games and fun Cookshop recipes. This coming year, the Title III teachers will focus on hands-on science activities (animal habitats and plant diversity) and Cookshop skills with the parents and students that support P4K's curriculum. For instance, volunteer guest speakers will facilitate how to introduce science at home in a way that supports the NGLS curriculum. Also, there will be speech, occupational therapy, and Cookshop training sessions. The materials and supplies will be purchased and/or made using technology (Boardmaker software) to assist parents in building functional communication tools that will benefit their children. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parent Engagement Activities will support our students through a cohesive home-school connection that will help meet the needs of our ELLs with severe disabilities in an academic as well as social environment. ELL parents will be invited to participate and work alongside their children in the workshop series that will run for six Saturdays from March to April 2019. These parents will receive direct instruction from the ENL and technology teachers in a group format, with each instructor taking a segment of the morning. Parents will also receive translation and interpretation services as necessary during these workshops from the bilingual support staff. Students will receive direct instruction from the teachers as they rotate into the student group rooms based on a schedule. This allows all instructors to work with parents and students alike throughout the course of the morning. This structure also helps parents understand what their children’s school day is like using a 3E Center-Based Model. In February 2019, Title III information will be distributed to families in English as well as their native languages. In addition, we will have a Parent Orientation Breakfast in March 2019 from 9:30-10:30 am, at no additional cost to Title III. During this time, we will distribute surveys in English as well as parents' home languages, to inquire about interest levels in activities aimed at building language and literacy skills. The Parent Coordinator will work with the Assistant Principal to ensure that all ELL parents have the same information about Title III. The breakfast will cover a range of topics such as building social skills, literacy skills, student interests, and help with homework assignments. 6  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities In the past nine years, parents have sought support in our Saturday academy. With our help, they worked on building behavior support systems and literacy skills through the use of communication symbols, thereby strengthening the home-school connection for our ELLs. They also received assistance with homework completion, increasing independence, and improving ADL skills for their children at home. The supplemental Saturday academy is focused on building language, supporting content-area, communication, and at-home scheduling. Finally, we provide parents with the skills and information necessary to make technology functional in their lives, such as accessing Internet searches for information, applying for library cards online, and searching for local services that they may need. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) Budgeted Amount Instruction: $7626.30 Secretary: $149.48 Prof. Development: $1,525.26 Total: $9,670.54  Per session  Per diem Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Instruction: 1 Sup x 6 Sat x 5 h x $63.45 = $1,903.50 2 Teach x 6 Sat x5 h x $60.65 = $3,639.00 2 Paras x 6 Sat x 5 h x $34.73 = $2,083.80 Secretary: 1 Sec. @ $37.37 x 4 h= $149.48 Prof. Dev: 1 Sup x 1 hr x 6x $63.45 = $380.70 2 Teach x 1 hr x 6x $60.65 = $727.80 2 Paras x 1 hr x 6 x $34.73 = $416.76 Parent Engagement: 1 Sup x 2hr x $63.45 = $126.90 2 Teach x 2 hr x $60.65=$ 242.60 0 Purchased services  High 0 quality staff and curricul7  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Budgeted Amount um development contracts. Supplies and materials $2170.46  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software 0 Laminating Pouches $400 Multi-purpose copy paper = $50 Play dough supplies: flour, food coloring, glue, cream of tartar $50 Folders, index cards, construction paper, key rings, hand-held hole punchers, binding spines, portfolio binders, portable dry-erase boards $400 Pens/pencils/markers/erasers/crayons/colored pencils/scissors/dry-erase markers and erasers $170 Arts & Craft Supplies: feathers, glue, glitter, eyes, pipe cleaners, plastic bags, brown bags, play dough, paper goods, cardstock $200 Science supplies: fish, aquariums, pet food, plants, terrariums, soil, & miscellaneous: $300 Cookshop Supplies: $300.46 Educational Games and activity pads: $200 Miscellaneous: $100 0 8  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category (Object Code 199) Travel Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Budgeted Amount Metro Cards 100 Refreshments for parents Other TOTAL $275.00 $250.00 $12,366.00 9  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 75 School Name P.S. K004 Borough Brooklyn School Number 4 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Deborah Evans Coach Derek Ramdass ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Rachael Blasco, ENL Teacher Teacher/Subject Area Sheila Ravelo, ENL Teacher Teacher/Subject Area Karen Fernando, Classrm Tchr Related-Service Provider Rachel Paras, SLP Superintendent N/A Assistant Principal Anselma Ferguson Coach Willa Barth School Counselor Adeliz Sanchez Parent Sorangi Alonzo Parent Coordinator LaTasha Green Field Support Center Staff Member Marcus Rivera Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 0  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 317 Total number of ELLs 64 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 20.19% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 Lang. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school uses the New York State Identification Test for English Language Learners (NYSITELL) in the beginning of the school year for the new entrants to help determine their eligibility for services. In addition, we use the Spanish LAB (SLAB) to measure the language proficiency of Spanish-speaking students who score below Commanding on the NYSITELL. The P4K ENL Assessment for Listening and Speaking as well as the New York State ESL Achievement Test (NYSESLAT) are used to assess progress in English Language Learner (ELL) proficiency levels. Some additional tools we use to assess early literacy skills of ELLs are Teacher’s College Assessment Pro (TCP), Student Annual Needs Determination Inventory (SANDI), and Formative Assessment of Standards Tasks (FAST). The FAST is a multi-level assessment used to measure students' skills based on the Next Generation Learning Standards (NGLS) for Reading for 1  information (RI.1) and the Math Standard for Operations and Algebraic Thinking (OA). Besides these assessments, we use New York State Alternate Assessment (NYSAA) Math, Science, and English Language Arts (ELA) for Alternate Assessment students. ELLs who are Standardized Assessment students take the New York State Tests for ELA, Math, and Science. The data derived from these assessments is informative in designing and grouping ELLs for our school plan. Some other interventions and strategies our school provides include Academic Intervention Services (AIS) for inclusion students, Professional Learning Communities (PLC), one-on-one tutoring, leveled readers, Title III Language & Literacy Program, scaffolding and differentiated instruction. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? P4K's has many structures in place to support our ELLs' success. Our focus is to build the ELLs' language acquisition and provide content area support. We follow the 3E model (Engage, Explore and Evaluate) which encompasses center-based learning and many hands-on experiences to ensure maximum access to the Next Generation Learning Standards (NGLS). Instruction under this model is structured as follows: students are engaged in a 5-10 minute whole group mini-lesson, they break up into smaller groups for approximately 15 minute center rotations, and then come back together as a class to discuss and evaluate what they have learned. The 3E model is used throughout the school day, including the 90-minute ELA and Math blocks. Within our 3E model, we differentiate instruction, use graphic organizers, adapted materials and provide hands-on activities for multiple entry and exit points. Bilingual students are given additional language support from alternate placement paraprofessionals. They are also provided with bilingual instructional materials, such as glossaries and books, in their home language. We use adapted and leveled books, from sources such as Reading A to Z, to support students' foundational literacy skills. We use Let's Begin with the Letter People and Land of the Letter People to build language, syntax and fluency. To support the ELA curriculum themes, we use a series called Classic Books with Holes and author series books by Eric Carle, Kevin Henkes, Lois Ehlert, and Mo Willems, to name a few. For non-fiction, we use Candlewick Press books, Reading Rainbow Big Books by Houghton-Mifflin & Harcourt, Sandpiper Readers. In addition, we use leveled books from Crabtree Books, Barron's, and the Harper Trophy series. In support of the math curriculum, P4K uses the Equals Math Program which has tools and adapted materials for all SWDs including our ELLs. In addition, we use a a multitude of manipulatives and books that support the school's NGLS-aligned curriculum map. We use the Picture Window book series, Let's Read and Find out series by Harper-Collins, and Aladdin Paperback books for Science. We also use the FOSS Kits and other adapted materials to provide individualized hands-on learning activities. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? P4K evaluates the success of our Freestanding ENL Program in many ways. First, we use the New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT) to compare results across the years for each individual student and to monitor his/her progress annually. We also use the NYSESLAT performance levels to make adjustments to the delivery of curriculum and instruction. 2  In addition, we use the P4K ENL Assessment to evaluate language proficiency three times per year in the areas of Listening and Speaking. ENL teachers collaborate with classroom teachers in collecting daily data during instruction. Teachers also perform monthly End of Unit assessments for the various content areas. We also use the P4K rubrics to assess student work regularly, and more in-depth analyses of individual student progress take place during Professional Learning Communities. Finally, we use parent surveys and data to monitor and adjust the progress of our Title III Language & Literacy Program. We also look at the New York State Alternate Assessment (NYSAA) and standardized test results in ELA, math, and science to tailor a program that addresses the academic language acquisition needs of our students. while helping the them strive for success. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? P4K has many interventions in place once the summative data has been gathered. First, we design and deliver instruction that is culturally and linguistically appropriate for our ELLs with special needs. Results from these summative assessments also help in developing high quality Individual Educational Plans (IEPs) for our students. In addition, we have collaborative team meetings with school personnel and parents about the data collected regarding student progress. We also provide integrated language and content instruction to support ELLs through scaffolding, support of a bilingual alternate placement paraprofessional, and differentiated instruction to promote academic achievement in all content areas. For instructional materials, we use bilingual resources, leveled readers, hands-on activities, and age-appropriate realia that are aligned to the Next Generation Learning Standards. We also reach out to the community for resources through our parent coordinator to address the multiple needs of our ELLs. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] P4K is a K-5 District 75 school that uses a Response to Intervention (RTI) framework. RTI is a tiered model of service with academic interventions and problem solving teams that monitor and collect data to make collaborative decisions about ELLs with learning disabilities. P4K's ELLs are a diverse group, making it important to take instruction and assessment for RTI into account. P4K is aware many factors affect the English language acquisition process for ELLs with disabilities. We look at prior schooling, socio-economic level, SIFE status (Students with Inconsistent/Interrupted Formal Education), personal experiences, reasons for learning English, and familiarity with the English language. ELLs with disabilities exhibit difficulties in their first language due to the multiple physical and cognitive challenges they face which, in turn, impedes their new language acquisition as well. P4K utilizes multiple data points collected at baseline, midyear, and end-of-year assessments, to monitor student progress. We also provide instruction aligned to the Next Generation Learning Standards (NGLS) by differentiating, reviewing and implementing timely revisions to our curriculum map. Through the SANDI, TCP, the P4K ENL Assessment, and the NYSESLAT, we chart individual and grade level progress to illustrate growth. P4K applies RTI’s Problem-Solving model by providing individualized planning specific to the needs of the targeted ELL students. After multiple assessments, the ELL team collaborates with other educational staff to develop student IEPs by defining weakness and strength areas, analyzing them, evaluating student progress, and writing educational annual goals. In addition, ELL team collaborates with classroom teachers during the PLC meetings to analyze student work samples and determine the next steps to help individual students make progress. P4K is constantly assessing and designing interventions to ensure that ELLs fully participate in instruction and maximize English language acquisition across the content areas. P4K believes that collaboration between ENL, related service providers, and classroom teachers allows for greater implementation of ENL strategies for ELLs. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. 3  In the May 2017 NYSESLAT administration period, 66 ELLs with disabilities in grades K-5 were tested. Since then, 7 students articulated, and 4 students transferred to another school. Therefore the following NYSITELL/NYSESLAT analysis is based on the 2016 and 2017 scores of the remaining 55 ELLs. P4K’s ELL population showed approximately a 45% increase in their language proficiency skills. in 2017, 25 ELLs with disabilities scored Entering, 3 of which reflect as having no scores. These ELLs showed no movement in proficiency levels. Additionally, 21 students scored as Emerging, 19 of which progressed from Entering. Two students progressed to the Transitioning level, and 4 students scored Expanding. Additionally, one of our inclusion students met the multiple exiting criteria by scoring a 3 on the ELA state assessment and Expanding on the NYSESLAT. A total of 25 students made progress in their proficiency levels, while only 2 showed no progress on the NYSESLAT. The reason for some students' minimal progress on the NYSESLAT is that the test is standardized and was not designed for administration to students with severe disabilities. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? P4K has many structures in place to make adjustments to our diverse ELLs' educational programs. For instance, throughout the 3E model, we provide multiple entry and exit points to curriculum in academic centers. In addition, we differentiate instruction, use manipulatives, and provide visual supports. We follow NYS's Blueprint for English Language Learner Success by anchoring instruction in research-based practices such as the use of technology, hands-on activities, visual supports and graphic organizers. Some additional special educational structures include related services, individual accommodations to instruction, and the P4K curriculum map which is specifically designed to expose our early learning ELLs to the CCLS. These structures and academic supports help move ELLs along the continuum for language development and acquisition. The ENL teachers share the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT results with the classroom, cluster and related service providers in order to tailor the instruction for the ELLs and target their areas of need. For instance, the ENL teachers meet the instructional team and related services during Professional Learning Communities (PLCs) and parent-teacher meetings to discuss ELLs' language acquisition, work, progress, and next steps, as well as unit planning. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our organizational models are integrated and standalone, as per CR Part 154. During integrated sessions, the ENL teachers push into the class's 90-minute ELA and/or content area at the elementary level. Approximately half of P4K’s ELLs are identified as having an Entering English proficiency level. Standalone instruction is used in addition to the integrated model for teaching fundamental language to the Entering ELLs. Our school organization has made every effort possible to cluster ELLs into monolingual classrooms in order to facilitate an integrated ENL schedule. The ENL teachers provide service to the 6:1:1, 12:1:1, HES 12:1:1, and inclusion students. The majority of P4K’s ELL students participate in New York State Alternate Assessment; however, we have a small standardized assessment population as well. b. TBE program. If applicable. P4K does not currently have a TBE program. c. DL program. If applicable. P4K does not currently have a DL program. 4  2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? P4K is a K-5 school which follows the guidelines of CR Part 154 to deliver ENL instruction. We have two ENL teachers who service students at P4K’s seven building sites. The weekly minutes of instruction are broken down by proficiency levels as follows: Entering - 360 minutes (180 minutes integrated, 180 minutes standalone) Emerging - 360 minutes (180 minutes integrated, 90 minutes standalone, 90 minutes in ENL/content area) Transitioning - 180 minutes (90 minutes of integrated, 90 minutes standalone/or integrated ENL/content-area) Expanding - 180 minutes (only integrated ENL/ELA/content-area) Commanding- 90 integrated ENL/ELA/content (or other approved services) The ENL teachers integrate into the classrooms and provide Standalone ENL instruction to give students their mandated ENL minutes. Explicit ENL minutes are delivered according to CR Part 154 via the collaboration among the classroom and ENL teachers who support the grade level curriculum. The ENL teachers also strategically cluster the students to provide the maximum service possible. The students who are mandated bilingual instruction are serviced by the alternate placement paraprofessionals in conjunction with the classroom teacher, ENL teacher, and related service providers to ensure the maximum home language support throughout the school day. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The language of instruction in our ENL Program is English. The ENL teachers use various methods and approaches in the integrated/standalone models. In both models, ENL teachers use the New York State New Language Arts Progressions (NLAP) and the NYS Next Generation Learning Standards (NGLS). One method used to foster language development is Total Physical Response (TPR). This is often done in a game such as “Simon Says” i.e. “touch your nose, show me the window, where is the pencil?” We also use the Whole Language Approach to facilitate academic language acquisition. This philosophy has the belief that ENL teachers are not just teaching reading, rather they are guiding and assisting English Language Learners to develop as independent readers, writers and learners. Another methodology used in our ENL program is the Language Experience Approach (LEA) which brings together the combined abilities of the class in a literature based model. Lucy Calkins' philosophy states that a story-based teaching tool is a good way to introduce grammar rules in a creative way, such as in a pattern book. “Think-pair-share” is also a strategy used in cooperative learning, which we employ in our ENL program. The teacher poses a question. Then students pair up, think about the question, explore answers, and share it with the class. Our ENL teachers send homework with instructions in the parents' native language, as well as in English, in order to support the children’s language acquisition at home. If a child’s IEP requires bilingual instruction, a bilingual alternate placement paraprofessional is provided for the student in all content areas and homework is also sent home in the student's native language. In our ENL program, the ENL teachers and special education classroom teachers work collaboratively to create and implement IEP goals. They also plan for the instruction of our ELL students using differentiation for all subgroups. ENL teachers integrate into the classrooms, following the integrated teaching model, during ELA and other content areas in order to provide support using ENL methodologies. Using the standalone model, the ENL teachers follow the school’s NGLS-aligned curriculum map for planning rigorous instruction. They use the following resources: adapted books, leveled readers, bilingual books and glossaries, Reading A to Z, and Lakeshore's Emergent Reader's Series. Our ENL and classrooms teachers also integrate the 5  monthly school theme, NLAP, NGLS, and use adapted reading materials for students with disabilities to scaffold content area instruction. ENL methodologies support the core curriculum by building vocabulary, teaching students to follow directions and perform actions, as well as providing hands-on learning experiences. The ENL teachers also utilize the Student Annual Needs Determination Inventory (SANDI) assessment and P4K’s student work rubric to gauge student progress. The philosophies mentioned above are implemented through the use of realia, adapted books related to P4K’s curriculum maps, ELA programs, and other learning tools. ENL methodologies and strategies are implemented through interdisciplinary center-based activities, following the 3E model (Engage, Explore, Evaluate). In addition, technology is infused into lessons on a daily basis. Additionally, we incorporate the Applied Behavioral Analysis (ABA) principles and the Picture Exchange Communication System (PECS) into our instruction to increase language acquisition in a more natural way. In order to support our 64 ELLs, the ENL teachers work collaboratively with classroom teachers to use and adapt grade level curriculum on an ongoing basis. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? According to CR Part 154, students with a native language of Spanish are given the NYSITELL and further evaluated with the Spanish LAB, if they do not pass the NYSITELL. This is part of the identification process and is conducted within the first twenty days of admission to the NYCDOE, for students who have an IEP. As the year progresses, students who are mandated bilingual instruction are provided support in their native language with an alternate placement paraprofessional, as per their IEP. In addition to ENL services, native language support is also provided to our ELLs through the use of bilingual dictionaries, books, and technology websites as well as our special education classrooms. Their home language is informally assessed by bilingual pedagogues and shared with the educational team throughout the year. Students' English language skills are evaluated using a school-based assessment three times per year. Additionally, a formal bilingual educational evaluation is arranged by the school psychologist in accordance with triennial IEP meetings. According to the NYCDOE's Standard Operating Procedures Manual for Referral, Evaluation, Placement of School-Age Children with Disabilities (SOPM), if a bilingual assessment is required, the Bilingual Cascade must be followed (SOPM, p55-57) to ensuring the most appropriate assessment personnel are involved in assessing our ELLs. Step One, the most preferred option, involves a bilingual assessment professional conducting the evaluation. Step Two involves the DOE's bilingual teacher serving as an interpreter (note, an interpreter may not be used for Spanish Assessments). In Step Three a college graduate trained interpreter such as a paraprofessional who is a trained interpreter, or a Contract agency trained interpreter may assist with the evaluation. Step Four involves a non-college graduate trained interpreter, which may be a DOE paraprofessional trained interpreter or an interpreter from a contract agency. If there are no other means available, then Step Five, the last option, is a Bilingual Community Volunteer serving as an interpreter. When a student is in need of a bilingual assessment and there is no qualified professional at the school, the school psychologist or clerical/family worker requests assistance in obtaining a qualified professional from the Integrated Service Center by completing both the Request for Specialized Evaluation and the School Psychologist Request for Assistance Forms. The school psychologist maintains responsibility for the case. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status This school year's ATS report, ‘RSFE’, reveals that there are no SIFE students identified in the P4K organization. However, if a SIFE ELL student was enrolled in our school, that student would be provided a buddy system and provided focused AIS services. In order to support this subgroup academically in the content areas, we would use multiple ENL strategies (TPR, LEA, and the Natural Approach) in conjunction with scaffolding techniques such as, modeling, bridging, schema building, text re-representation, and metacognition. The Special Education classroom teachers infuse ENL strategies into their instruction through formal/informal collaborative support from our ENL teachers. The majority of our ELLs are Newcomers; we have 42 students in this subgroup. ELLs in this subgroup will continue to receive 6  their mandated CR Part 154 minutes from their fully certified ENL providers, as per the K-8 proficiency levels (360 minutes for Entering & Emerging, 180 minutes of ENL for Transitioning, 180 minutes for Expanding ELLs, and 90 minutes for Commanding for 2 years). We use multiple ENL methodologies (TPR, LEA, and the Natural Approach) in conjunction with scaffolding, modeling, bridging, schema building, text re-representation, and metacognition. Additionally, we incorporate the ABA principles and PECS into our instruction as well. Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) which replaced No Child Left Behind in 2015, requires ELA testing for all ELLs after one year, the ENL teachers work collaboratively with classroom teachers to support grade level curriculum with adaptive books, scaffolding, and the use of Mayer-Johnson picture symbols during integrated sessions. P4K uses Positive Behavioral Intervention and Supports (PBIS) with our Newcomers to increase appropriate behaviors, and at the same time, enhance students’ ability to learn more effectively. We have identified 24 ELLs in the Developing subgroup (receiving services 4-6 years) who have been receiving services. In addition to the mandated minutes of support students receive, ENL and classroom teachers meet during weekly Professional Learning Communities (PLCs), as well as IEP meetings, to discuss students’ past and future goals. Student progress is charted by daily data collection, monthly checklists, and end of unit assessments. The information is also reviewed by the ELL's educational team on a quarterly basis. SMART (Specific, Measurable, Attainable, Realistic and Timely) goals are designed for all content-areas to ensure academic growth for our ELLs in the Developing subgroup. P4K does not currently have any Long-Term ELLs (receiving services seven or more years). In the event that a Long-Term ELL is placed in our school, he/she would continue to receive their CR Part 154 mandated ENL minutes for the K-8 based on proficiency levels, as listed above. The focus will be on the reading and writing modalities in order to continue the development of literacy and communication skills in English. Our ELL students would be provided with differentiated instruction in reading and writing, using ENL strategies and methods, adapted books, Mayer-Johnson symbols, communication books, and AAC (Augmentative and Alternative Communication) devices in order to make the English language more comprehensible. As with the other subgroups, ENL strategies and methods include LEA, TPR, the Whole Language Approach, scaffolding, visual supports, and the use of graphic organizers. P4K would use Positive Behavioral Intervention and Supports (PBIS) with our Long-Term ELLs to increase appropriate behaviors, enhancing students’ ability to learn more effectively. At this time, P4K has no Former ELLs. In the event of a student within P4K becoming a Former ELL, we would provide 90 minutes of ENL services weekly for two years, as currently mandated by CR Part 154. ENL teaching strategies, using the following methodologies, support this subgroup: LEA, the Natural Approach, and Cloze strategies. We would systematically review academic language and vocabulary that are needed in order to be successful in the content areas. We would also emphasize functional words, differentiated materials, and visual supports, as well as encourage Former ELLs to attend the Title III program as a supplemental support service. All of our students in the ELL subgroups who are mandated bilingual instruction are provided with bilingual alternate placement paraprofessionals to assist them in their native languages. In addition, our ELLs also have an opportunity to participate in Language & Literacy, our supplemental Title III Program on specific Saturdays in March through May. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? There are many instructional strategies that the ENL teachers use to accommodate the ELLs who are students with special needs. These materials and strategies encompass differentiated instruction in order to address students’ IEP goals and accommodations. This includes grade level adapted books, grade-level teacher made materials, leveled libraries, differentiated writing materials, graphic organizers, scaffolding, center-based learning stations, and visual supports. Some ENL strategies that we use are TPR, Whole Language Approach, LEA, Realia (real-life experiences and items), and building on students' prior knowledge. P4K pedagogues also collaborate with related service providers (speech, occupational therapy, physical therapy) to facilitate language acquisition. To assist in teaching reading to our nonverbal students, we use sentence utterance strips, picture cues, and AAC devices. The occupational therapists collaborate with special education and ENL teachers to facilitate writing and increase the ELLs’ fine motor skills. We also use integrated and standalone models to teach and co-teach grade level material. 7  7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? P4K groups and schedules ELLs with special needs according to classification ratio, grade level, and proficiency level, while keeping in mind their learning styles. The criteria used for placing ELLs with disabilities in their respective groups are student proficiency levels, which determine the number of integrated and/or standalone minutes to be provided, as stipulated by CR Part 154. The ENL teachers provide support and differentiation of core content lessons using an Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT) model to increase language acquisition for ELLs with disabilities. P4K has scheduling flexibility, allowing the ENL teachers to follow a 3E center-based learning model, where students learn with hands-on materials to address their individual learning styles. In addition, ENL teachers provide standalone ENL instruction in core content areas for an increased focus on language acquisition. Some curriculum programs that we use are: Reading A to Z, Edmark Reading Program, SMILE, Equals Mathematics, FOSS, STEAM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts, and Math), EASE (Everyday Arts for Special Education), Splash Math, and the Lakeshore Educational Series. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All ELLs participate in our targeted intervention service programs. These programs are aligned with ENL methodologies and the NGLS. All targeted intervention and instruction is delivered in English. However, if the child is mandated for bilingual instruction, an alternate placement paraprofessional and bilingual dictionaries/Native Language Arts materials are used for intervention. For ELA, we use many programs for intervention such as: SMILE, a structured phonics-based program (daily twenty-minute sessions); Edmark Reading Program (2-3 times a week), and leveled libraries. We also use leveled books from the Reading A to Z online program. Other interventions are the use of TOBIs (True Object Based Icons), realia, and the building of foundational literacy skills. We also incorporate PBIS, a program developed to increase appropriate behaviors while enhancing students’ ability to learn more effectively. In addition, we use BoardMaker (a research-based program for adapting lessons), and teacher-created materials that are differentiated and scaffolded according to each students’ learning style. We also include some learning strategies such as the use of graphic organizers and visual supports for all learners. For math, P4K uses a combination of the Equals Mathematics and Everyday Mathematics programs during daily instruction. Equals Mathematics, published by Ablenet, is a K-12, standards-based curriculum for students with mild, moderate, and severe disabilities. The curriculum is a K-12 program aligned to State, Alternate, Common Core Standards, and Common Core Essential Elements. Equals encompasses pre-readiness math skills, foundational math skills, and concepts found in all math content areas with problem solving at the core of every lesson. Equals provides three flexible levels of instruction and materials for students with mild, moderate, and severe disabilities in every lesson. Given the variety of manipulatives and picture-symbol supported vocabulary, worksheets, and problems, Equals is an appropriate choice for students with cognitive disabilities, Autism, and for English Language Learners. Equals is supplemented with Everyday Mathematics, which is a research-based Pre-K through 6th grade curriculum, developed by the University of Chicago School Mathematics Project. Everyday Mathematics emphasizes the application of mathematics to real world situations. Everyday Mathematics lessons include time for whole-group instruction as well as small group, partner, or individual activities. We will also be piloting a web-based/iPad math program called Splash Math. This program introduces the learning and practice of math with fun interactive games that help students understand difficult concepts with ease. The program is aligned to the NGLS. These activities balance teacher-directed instruction with opportunities for open-ended, hands-on explorations, long-term projects and on-going practice for language acquisition and content-area support. For Social Studies, we follow the NYCDOE Scope and Sequence and adapt it for our diverse ELLs. For instance, to support our ELLs, we use leveled books, such as Reading A to Z, Lakeshore, Harcourt, and Willow Books. We also provide multicultural materials, bilingual books, adapted big books, graphic organizers, teacher-created materials, and center-based instruction to meet students’ IEP annual goals. P4K also has incorporated a Social Studies cluster teacher to meet the needs of our ELLs with special needs. 8  For Science we use Full Option Science System (FOSS) kits. FOSS is a research-based science curriculum for grades K–6 developed at the Lawrence Hall of Science, University of California at Berkeley. The students use manipulatives, interactive videos, and center-based learning stations with differentiated hands-on activities. Some supplemental books include Gail Gibbons books and Lakeshore books. We also have science cluster teachers, which has proven to be very successful in developing language acquisition with the hands-on manipulatives and activites in a science laboratory and classrooms. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Based on the data and trends of P4K, we have integrated new programs and teaching approaches. These innovations have been successful with our ELLs. P4K was awarded a Title III Grant for a Saturday Literacy Program. This program was in place for the past seven years, and has been revised with a new curriculum, based on feedback from parent exit surveys. We have added a science component to introduce health and wellness, CookShop, animal habitats, and plant life cycles. The program was very successful, and we hope to continue the curriculum for the upcoming school year. Everyday Arts for Special Education (EASE) is a professional development program, through Urban Arts Partnership, that has been evaluated by Dr. Rob Horowitz, Associate Director of the Center for Arts Education Research at Teachers College, Columbia University. It is designed to improve student achievement in the areas of communication, socialization, academic learning, and arts proficiency through integrated, arts-based approaches. Through a series of training workshops and extensive in-school support, participating teachers learn skills and strategies across multiple arts disciplines (music, dance, visual arts, and theater) in order to integrate the arts into their classroom instruction and help students with language acquisition. Additionally, we have increased our staffing for cluster teachers. We have added a social studies cluster teacher and an additional science cluster teacher. This expansion has been instrumental in our ELLs' language learning experience. For example, students are provided with hand-on learning activities in a learning environment specifically tailored to science or social studies outside of their classroom. Here, the curriculum comes alive for them with realia, hands-on science experiments, as well as cultural activities. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? P4K has never had a bilingual program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs have equal access to all programs based on their individual needs and referrals. They fully participate in academic curriculum and learning in cooperation with their peers, teachers, and parents. ELLs' Individual Educational Program may include adaptive physical education, speech therapy, occupational therapy, physical therapy, and counseling. Title III, a supplemental program, is also offered to all ELLs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. P4K has a supplemental Title III Grant Saturday Program that bridges the home and the school with literacy and technology to facilitate learning. In order to increase English language acquisition and generalized academic skills, P4K implements the use of a 3E model which incorporates hands-on activities, visual supports, and adapted materials to bring the school's CCLS-aligned curriculum map to life. In addition, P4K uses the following technology resources: Flocabulary.com, BrainpopJr.com, Starfall.com, Equals Mathematics, Splash Math, Reading a-z.com, computers, iPads, Triumph Boards, Smartboards, Puppet Pals app, and other educational apps related to the curriculum themes. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? P4K only has an ENL program model. As stipulated in CR Part 154, students with a native language of Spanish are given the Spanish LAB if they do not pass the NYSITELL. These tests are administered within the first twenty days of the student’s admission to the NYCDOE for students with IEPs. We support the native language of our students by providing an alternate placement paraprofessional for the students who are mandated bilingual instruction, as per their IEP. Native language support is also provided to our ELLs through the use of bilingual picture dictionaries, leveled books, a Native Language Arts lending library for parents to read with their children, and technology/websites. 9  For our ELLs, their home language is assessed in many ways. If a student is mandated bilingual instruction, an alternate placement paraprofessional is provided for support and feedback of his/her language acquisition. For a student's triennial, the psychologist schedules a bilingual evaluation in their native language to see what language is dominate. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. P4K’s curriculum map is aligned by grade level and is age-appropriate for our ELLs. It is adapted and corresponds to the general education curriculum that is aligned to the Next Generation Learning Standards. The ENL teachers use adapted materials, visual supports, graphic organizers, and leveled books to facilitate learning across the curriculum map. P4K utilizes interdisciplinary center-based learning strategies and technology to maximize student success. Moreover, IEP goals are created to ensure language acquisition and content-area support. Resources are created by the ENL teachers that are used to differentiate lessons with multiple entry and exit points. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? P4K is a special education school that shares a building in seven community schools. The administration and staff work collaboratively building relationships inside and outside the school community. P4K and the community schools work together to mainstream students and have an inclusion program at two of our sites. We also have families whose children are enrolled in a P4K site and it's co-located community school simultaneously services their siblings. P4K and the community schools we are housed in work on flexible scheduling to share space, resources, and intervention programs. The P4K Principal and Assistant Principals have well established working relationships with the administration in their co-located buildings. In addition, P4K's ENL teachers collaborate with the general education ENL teachers in their respective sites. P4K further supports ELLs through our supplemental Title III Saturday Program that bridges home, school and the community with literacy and technology to facilitate learning. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled students are provided with educational opportunities and life learning experiences prior to the new school year. Our school has a Pre-K program and teachers of Pre-K students who need language support collaborate with the ENL teachers regarding implementation of ENL strategies and methodologies of instruction. In addition, the ELL identification process begins in June for currently enrolled Pre-K students in order to ensure that their home languages are correctly notated. Also, ELLs are invited to P4K’s Chapter 683, a six week academic program from July to August. Throughout the year, ENL teachers work with classroom teachers on implementing the curriculum. Other school activities are coordinated by the ELL Supervisor, the Adaptive Physical Education teachers, school counselors/psychologists, related service providers, and Parent Coordinator. These activities include: gardening, swimming, monthly celebrations, Carnival Fun Day, Field Day, curriculum-related field trips, EASE, ELL Saturday Title III Program, and multicultural activities in the school community. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? P4K does not offer language electives. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? P4K does not offer dual language programs. 0  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The ENL teachers and all teachers of ELLs attend, and will continue to attend, district/citywide Professional Development (PD) sessions as per CR Part 154. We will continue Professional Learning Communities with our ENL teachers and those teachers of ELL students. We expect that our collaboration will increase efficiency of the delivery of ENL services to our students. P4K’s Professional Development (PD) plan for the 2017-2019 school years includes topics pertaining to ELL education such as: strategies for Native Language Arts instruction, Alternate Placement Paraprofessional trainings, Balanced Literacy, teaching of ENL through content areas, Co-Teaching Models, Standardized Assessment and Alternate Assessment methods for ELLs, the use of technology in Bilingual and ENL education, and the adaptation of Bilingual and ENL material for instructing ELLs with severe disabilities. Teachers will also attend mandated Jose P. workshops. Additional emphasis for professional development will be placed on training classroom teachers of ELLs to better support their language needs. The ENL teachers consult regularly with the ENL District Coach, and attend PD sessions, in order to be updated on any changes in district-wide policies. Furthermore, ENL teachers will continue to attend workshops to facilitate learning for ELLs with disabilities and using various assessment tools. Administration, classroom teachers, and support staff are required to take professional development courses in District 75. On www.district75pd.org, educators can register for classes. Also, the ENL teachers work collaboratively with classroom teachers, administration, and support staff on a daily basis. In addition, there are monthly PLCs designed to discuss the progress of the ELLs and other SWDs. District 75 has a supportive program for administrators of ELLs. Administration receives training on testing, compliance, grouping ELLs for classroom teachers, and communicating with ELL families. They also receive professional development in designing new academic programs, strategies, and texts to train teachers of ELLs from District 75 and the NYCDOE. Bilingual and ENL Coordinators receive training from the District 75 OELL on both ELL compliance and instruction of ELL SWDs For instance, the District 75 Office of ELLs (OELL) provides updated information that is bases on City, State, and Federal policies. Paraprofessionals receive behavioral and student training through District 75 and their classroom teachers. Guidance counselors and school psychologists can receive Autism, ELL, and Jose P. training through the District 75 OELL. Related services (speech, physical therapy, occupational therapy) receive cultural sensitivity training for understanding ELLs. The lead teacher also provides informal training and support to newly arrived staff. Secretaries and parent coordinators attend in-school and District 75 workshops concerning language, culture, and Autism. Staff is required to keep a list of PD dates and agendas, to notify the lead teachers/administration in order to document their professional development hours. In addition, a minimum of 10 hours of Jose P. training is required for all classroom teachers. P4K follows a scheduled time-line for professional development for teachers of ELLs with disabilities. During September, all school personnel receive training on implementing the Common Core Learning Standards. Every week, during professional option periods, each site schedules time for mini-professional development sessions in teaching ELLs and students special needs. Chancellor’s Conference Days are held 3 times a year: the first day of school, Election Day in November, and Chancellor’s Conference Day in June. Also, Special Education Student Information System (SESIS) training is given by in-house staff that is scheduled during professional option periods. Finally, P4K staff receive monthly in-house ELA/Social Studies and Math/Science PDs that speak to and incorporate ENL strategies for instruction. 1  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. P4K provides professional development to all teachers and administrators that specifically address the needs of ELLs. A minimum of 15% of the required PD hours for teachers prescribed by CR Part 154.2 must be dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. ENL teachers are required to have a minimum of 50% of their PD hours dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with NGLS content area instruction. These PDs include a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies, integrated language, and instruction for ELLs. Also, non-ELL teachers, related service providers and administrators are invited to attend District 75 PDs, as well as DELLs PDs on ELL topics. District 75’s Office of ELLs offers Jose P. training to all classroom teachers. We send our new teachers to these training each year and maintain a record of pedagogues attended. These records are kept in our ELL compliance binders, which are submitted to District 75’s Office of ELLs, and are kept at each P4K site. In addition, teachers maintain their own records of professional development, which are submitted to NYS every 5 years for maintenance of Professional Teaching Certificates. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? During our many school activities and workshops for parental involvement the ENL teachers, related service providers, classroom teachers and ELL parents discuss the goals, progress, language proficiency of the ELLs. ENL teachers also schedule individual ELL parent meetings to discuss the progress of their child. Interpreters are provided through in-house staff and/or the Translation and Interpretation Unit. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. P4K has an active ELL parent involvement. Parents are continually engaged in monthly school-wide celebrations, meetings, workshops, and initiatives. During these functions, parents are provided with interpretation and translation services in their native language. Additionally, records of attendance and minutes are kept for Language Proficiency Team (LPT) meetings, telephone conferences, IEP meetings, letters, daily communication book correspondence, informal meetings during monthly celebrations. Copies are kept in the student's cumulative records and datafolios, as required by CR Part 154. Parent-teacher conferences and individual Parent ELL meetings are held twice a year to discuss the ELLs’ progress. Monthly awards and celebrations are done at each site to celebrate ELLs' achievements. Parents receive a monthly newsletter from the classroom teachers describing what the children learn each month. There are also many multicultural celebrations that parents attend, such as: Halloween Parade, Chinese New Year, Cinco de Mayo, and a Holiday Show in December. In addition, parents are invited to workshops and the ELL Title III Saturday Language & Literacy Program. Ms. LaTasha Green, P4K’s Parent Coordinator, organizes “Getting Ready for Middle School” workshops during the spring semester at each site to facilitate the ELLs’ transition from elementary to middle school. Parent notification letters are sent out in the students’ home languages. The Language Translation and Interpretation Unit is used for interpretation during meetings. She also sends information home to parents regarding city-wide programs for ELLs with disabilities. 2  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 3 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Deborah Evans, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 4  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P4K School DBN: 75K004 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Deborah Evans Title Principal Anselma Ferguson Assistant Principal LaTasha Green Parent Coordinator Rachael Blasco ENL/Bilingual Teacher Sorangi Alonzo Parent Sheila Ravelo Teacher/Subject Area Karen Fernando/Clssrm Tchr Teacher/Subject Area Derek Ramdass Willa Barth Rachel Paras Adeliz Sanchez N/A N/A N/A N/A Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other N/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 08/03/17 08/03/17 08/03/17 08/03/17 08/03/17 08/03/17 08/03/17 08/03/17 08/03/17 08/03/17 08/03/17 N/A N/A N/A N/A 5  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 75004 School Name: P4K Superintendent: K Louissaint The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No LaTasha Green Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. P4K determines its language translation and interpretation needs by using data gathered from the following: the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS), intake packets, RCPL (Parents' Preferred Language Report) in ATS and emergency cards. At the Committee on Special Education (CSE) meeting, the team meets with the parents, their home language is assessed and recorded through their HLIS. An interpreter is also provided at the CSE meeting for parents who need the service. If this process does not occur at the CSE, the HLIS and NYSITELL are administered and recorded at the school level. P4K personnel who conduct the intake process are pedagogues trained in administering the HLIS as well as other documents that can help in identifying a parent's language needs. This direct contact with the parents and legal guardians assists with the evaluation and assessment of the English Language Learners’ (ELL) needs, as well as the needs of their parents or guardians. The Language Proficiency Team team analyzes the HLIS to determine a student's home language. ELL status and home language are recorded and cross-referenced in ATS reports (RCPL, 6  RLER, RPOB, RLAT, REXH, HISE, RADP, ELPC RYOS, RCRL), intake packets, student's IEP, and emergency cards. The parents' preferred home language is also recorded in the PARL, UPG, and RCPL screens in ATS. P4K has bilingual staff members who translate and interpret all communication for parents, such as: correspondence, progress reports, report cards, and daily communication, as needed. A translator is provided at the time of the IEP meeting, Parent Teacher Conferences, and individual parent meetings. Currently, P4K has 64 ELLs, some of whose parents need translation and interpretation services. At P4K, we currently provide in-house translation and interpretation services for the following languages: Spanish, French, Haitian-Creole, Russian, Arabic, and Chinese/Cantonese. ELL parents, are provided with a translated Bill of Parents' Rights and Responsibilities from the NYCDOE website. P4K has appropriate school signage and forms in all languages mentioned above. School-related documents are translated by the in-house translation team and the NYCDOE's Language Translation and Interpretation Unit. ENL teachers collaborate with administration and staff regarding which parents need written translation and oral interpretation. Following this process, a list of ELLs and their home languages is drafted and shared with the P4K school community; administrators, parent coordinator, lead teachers, classroom teachers, related service providers, cluster teachers, psychologists, counselors, and paraprofessionals. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic Bengali Chinese/Any Cantonese French Haitian-Creole English Punjabi Polish Russian Spanish Urdu Wolof 1 1 1 0 2 5 222 1 1 0 31 1 1 .37 .37 .37 0 .75 1.87 83.15 .37 .37 0 11.61 .37 .37 1 2 0 1 2 7 219 1 1 0 31 1 1 .37 .75 0 .37 .75 2.62 82.02 .37 .37 0 11.61 .37 .37 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. None 7  Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Progress Reports & Report Cards All year Welcome Letters Upon enrollment Title III Information March to June School Calendar Once per year IEP Once per year Permission Slips As needed Newsletters School Notices Monthly As needed NYS Testing Dates Spring semester NYSESLAT Letters Spring semester Letters from school nurse and other important information As needed Translation & Interpretation Unit and/or in-house staff Translation & Interpretation Unit and/or in-house staff Translation & Interpretation Unit and/or in-house staff Translation & Interpretation Unit and/or in-house staff Translation & Interpretation Unit and/or in-house staff Translation & Interpretation Unit and/or in-house staff Translation & Interpretation Unit and/or in-house staff Translation & Interpretation Unit and/or in-house staff Translation & Interpretation Unit and/or in-house staff Translation & Interpretation Unit and/or in-house staff Translation & Interpretation Unit and/or in-house staff 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings Open House Parent Meet and Greet Event October 2017 How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? For all of P4K's meetings with our ELL parents, we have in-house staff 8  Parent-Teacher Conferences - ELL Parent Orientation Meetings IEP Meetings, Monthly Awards Celebrations Title III Program Parent Workshops regarding curriculum, instruction, assessment, and related service supports (facilitated by Parent Coordinator) Parent Association Meetings, School Leadership Team Meetings Outreach to parents via telephone calls by teachers, psychologists, counselors, nurse, administration, related services that provides interpretation services in Arabic, Chinese/Cantonese, Spanish, French, Haitian-Creole, and Russian. For other languages, we call the Language Interpretation and Translation Unit ahead of time for an interpreter to come our site, or provide over the phone services. For all P4K documents that need to be translated for our ELL population, we have in-house staff translate in Arabic, Chinese/Cantonese, Spanish, Russian, French, and Haitian-Creole. For other languages, we submit document to the Language Translation and Interpretation Unit in a timely manner. October, November 2017 & March 2018 and as needed when Newcomers arrive November 2017 through June 2018 March through May 2018 Monthly As needed 9  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. The BRT (Building Response Team) at each site has a list of parents that require notification of school emergencies in their native language in the "go bags." If that language is not available, we call the Language Translation and Interpretation Unit to relay a message. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The P4K Staff Handbook publishes the guidelines for CR A-663 and the principal has meetings and trains staff throughout the sites to ensure that they are followed. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) P4K fulfills Section VII of Chancellor's Regulations A-663 by translating and disseminating notices and any NYC DOE documents to our ELL parents. P4K translates documents in home languages and provides in-house/NYC T&I interpreters at all one-on-one and group meetings at the parents' request. The Parent Coordinator and the Language Access Coordinator work in conjunction with the ENL teachers to ensure ELL parents have translation and interpretation services, as appropriate. Translated signage is posted at each site's entrance for parents' preferred language needs. Also, the security guard and the main offices have translated cards if they need assistance in their native language with the NYCDOE's Language Line phone number. In addition, brochures, flyers, and letters are translated in a timely fashion by in-house staff or by the Language Translation and Interpretation department via email request. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? P4K participates in disseminating the personalized NYC DOE Parent Survey to gather parental feedback. We encourage parents to complete the survey during parent-teacher conferences and other meetings within NYC DOE's time frame. During face-to-face contact and via telephone, school staff (i.e. ENL teachers, classroom teachers) ask parents about their experiences with translation and interpretation services. The ENL teachers also collaborate with the classroom teachers, staff, parent coordinator, and administration in keeping an updated list on ELL parents' home language 0  needs for interpretation and translation. We also capture information from RCPL, RPOB, and BIOD in ATS to keep updated records. P4K provides a 6-week Title III program that promotes language enrichment for our ELLs and their families. During orientation meetings and throughout the program, parents are encouraged to share their needs and experiences regarding translation and interpretation services. Parental feedback is also provided on exit surveys at Title III ELL Programs. P4K provides monthly parent workshops which provide a safe forum for parents to discuss and provide feedback regarding the quality and availability of services. Families are encouraged to reach out to their children's teachers, lead teachers, and school administration with any concerns relating to their language needs. 1 
