 School Name: 15K024 P.S. 024 Principal: JACKIE NIKOVIC   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information PS 24 331500010024 Pre-K - 5 School Number (DBN): 15K024 427 38 th Street; Brooklyn, NY 11232 (718) 832-9366 (718) 832-9360 Phone Number: Fax: Jacqueline Nikovic jnikovic@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 15 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Jacqueline Nikovic Julia Masi Alicia Torres & Juliana Salas Alicia Torres Alicia Torres NA Sully Diaz District Information Anita Skop Superintendent: 131 Livingston Street askop@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 935-4317 Phone Number: 718 935-4356 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Brooklyn North Bernadette Fitzgerald FSC: Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 131 Livingston Street BFitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-3954 Phone Number: Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Jacqueline Nikovic Julia Masi Juliana Salas NA Alicia Torres NA NA Sandra Perez Jennifer Nguyen Maria Diaz Anthony DiModica Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Teacher Teacher Teacher Teacher   Yuye Xue AnaisValdez Sully Diaz Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Parent Parent Member/CBO Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? We are a preK-5 Dual Language school that empowers our students to be creative and critical thinkers, ambitious risk-takers, and life-long learners. We do this by: providing an inclusive environment to ensure the academic, linguistic, physical, and social-emotional growth of our diverse student body; creating collaborative relationships between students, staff, and our community; and by designing learning experiences that are both meaningful and impactful.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. One of our goals continues to be to improve student performance by strengthening teacher practice. As a dual language school, our focus centers around developing academic language through discussion. Our teachers have been engaged in developing Socratic Seminar, debate and grand conversations in their lessons in grades 3-5. Next year we will expand that to include K-2. This past year we implemented two new curriculums: TERC Investigations for Math and the NYC Passport to Social Studies. We also started a new SEL program: Responsive Classroom. All these new curriculums build on the discussion model. In Math lessons, both in Number Talks and TERC, students are encouraged to use multiple strategies for solutions and discuss these strategies. There is a timeline of embedded assessments in our yearly overviews to support the teachers' ongoing efforts to monitor student progress. In Responsive Classroom our focus was on Morning Meeting, Interactive modeling and positive teacher language. This past year our Science clusters extended their coverage to include kindergarten in the Science Lower lab, and 5th grade in the Science Upper las. This expanded program will ensure that students are receiving the science content using a hands-on model that is aligned to the scope and sequence and will build a strong content base which will better prepare them for the 4th grade science test. This upcoming year we will be focusing on transitioning to the Next Generation Standards and a new Science curriculum: Amplify. This year we were admitted into the Learning Partners Program. We will be working with PS 230 (host school) and PS 130 (partner school) to develop our instructional practices in literacy for our ELL students. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. PS 24, located in Sunset Park, Brooklyn is a dual language school that serves 677 students from PreK to grade 5. Depending on parent preference, students are taught in English and Spanish or in monolingual classes. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The element of the Framework for Great Schools were we made the most progress is also our key area of focus for this school year: rigorous instruction. We went from a score of 1.75 up to 1.98 on the 2018 school survey. Over 2 years, we have implemented new curriculums in Literacy, Math and Social Studies. There is now consistency within each grade, as well as vertical coherence. As we move forward, our focus will be to add rigor to our lessons. We will accomplish this by using the framework from LCI (Learner-Centered Initiatives) to revise our rubrics and add critical thinking to our lessons. Additionally, we have started to consistently and regularly meet in horizontal grade teams to look at student work and plan targeted small group instruction. 0  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 15K024 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 655 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 18 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 20 19 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 95.0% % Attendance Rate 91.9% % Reduced Lunch 42.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 87.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 5.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.09 0% 16% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 20.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 80% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YSH N/A NO YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 98 95 94.3% 3.2% 16.6% 2.0% 4.6% 0.3% 4 4% 5.5 20.2% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In the 2017 Quality Review, our curriculum rating (QR 1.1) was developing. The reviewer found that we are beginning to incorporate rigorous tasks in our new literacy program (Schoolwide) and recommended that we provide our students with consistent opportunities for higher-order thinking and given access to cognitive engagement across subject areas. Our lowest rating on the 2018 School Survey was in rigorous instruction, the lowest subsection was on quality of student discussion. To this end, we will continue to build our teachers' pedagogical knowledge on improving the quality of discussions in Literacy (through debate, Socratic Seminar and Grand Conversations), Math and Social Studies. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students will engage in discussions in Literacy, Math, and Social Studies that include more higher order thinking/rigorous work as evidenced by an increase in the rating average for Danielson component 3b from 2.92 to a 3.05. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Monday PD for all classroom teachers will include work on unit and lesson plans Classroom Teachers September-June Pearson consultant, Southern Cross consultant, Thinking Maps consultant,APs Monthly walkthroughs by the principal and assistant principals to monitor fidelity to the curriculum, effectiveness of instruction and student engagement. Classroom teachers and students September-June Principal and two assistant principals Professional Learning sessions on Academic Language, Debate, Socratic Seminar with a focus on Dual Language students and ELLs. Teachers in grades 3-5 September-December FSC facilitator, Administration The AP supervising Special Ed and the SESIS will meet monthly with ICT teams to review assessment data on SWDs, to ensure that the new curriculum is meeting the needs of these students ICT teams and SWDs September-June Informal and formal observations of teachers using the Danielson Framework in targeted subject areas, with feedback on component 3b (Questions and Discussions) Teachers October-June ICT teams, SESIS, AP supervising Special Ed Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will meet with Parents during Parent Engagement time on Tuesdays to present new unit learnings. At the monthly PTA meetings, staff will present information on each curriculum subject, with a focus on discussions and critical thinking. Family Fridays will be coordinated with the subject area covered at the PTA meeting, and parents can see it in action. Coaches will present additional workshops to parents once a month using the Tuesday Parent Engagement time. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. -Consultants from Southern Cross and Pearson, Richard Bluttal from NYHS, and Thinking Maps. -per diem to hire subs as needed to fill in for teachers who need targeted supports 3  -per session as needed to pay teachers for workshops and data review. -per diem as needed to pay subs so that ICT partners can review SWDs data Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. All classroom teachers will include rigorous discussions in Literacy, Math, and Social Studies. The Monday PD meetings will serve as monthly check-ins as teachers continue to plan instruction in the new curriculums. Administrators will monitor progress through observations using the Danielson Framework. Administrators and coaches will meet in mid-January to assess the progress of classroom discussions as well as growth in critical thinking skills by analyzing data on component 3b. Additionally, we will review conference notes on classroom discussions. This mid-point benchmark should provide evidence that at least 50% of the students in each class are showing progress in classroom discussions as evidenced by the conference notes. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Conference notes, Danielson ratings in 3b. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? This past school year (2017-2018) we saw an increase in occurrence reports. The number of occurrences increased from 55 to 298. About half of them (147) were in the classroom. This past year we began to implement Responsive Classroom incorporating Morning Meeting, interactive modeling, and positive language. We will continue to deepen our implementation of Responsive Classroom this year, focusing on fidelity to the program, and begin to add elements of RULER (the mood meter, the class/school charter). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In order to address the social-emotional needs of all students at PS 24, we will continue to implement a new Social Emotional Learning (SEL) program: Responsive Classroom. Responsive classroom incorporates morning meetings (which includes greetings, sharing, group activity and morning message), interactive modeling (explicitly teaching procedures and routines for academic and social skills) and positive teacher language. Additionally, we will include elements of RULER (the mood meter and the charter). By June 2019 all classrooms will incorporate these 3 elements of Responsive Classroom as part of the daily routine. Students will indicate their feelings daily on the mood meter. By the end of September 2018, Class charters will be displayed in every classroom. The school staff will create one charter for PS 24. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will attend workshops from Responsive Classroom. Classroom teachers will receive "The First Six Weeks of School" to support their RC practices. classroom teachers Sept-June Students will engage in mindfulness practices throughout the day, starting with a Victory Breath after the morning Pledge and including the mood meter. Students and staff September. - June Classroom teachers, guidance counselors, SEL committee, Responsive Classroom consultant Administration, Guidance Counselors Students will be provided additional supports such as Heart Math and Silent City Teachers will adhere with fidelity to the morning meeting structures and include morning meeting in their program cards a minimum of 2x/week Students Oct. - June guidance counselors classroom teachers September-June Teachers, administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The SEL committee will provide presentations/workshops at PTA meetings, and during Tuesday Parent Engagement time to familiarize parents with Responsive Classroom. This will happen twice during the school year, once in the fall semester and once in the spring. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. -per diem to pay for coverage when teachers attend Responsive Classroom training -per diem to pay for coverage when teachers attend meetings related to students' SEL plan -purchasing of Responsive Classroom books for all classrooms Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 6  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019, the Pupil Personnel Committee and the social workers from Lutheran will meet for a mid-year review to assess the performance of the students needing a high level of monitoring and also to reflect on how effective the group’s work has been thus far at pooling efforts, information and resources to improve the social emotional well being of students. Administrators will monitor OORS reports to assess if there is a decrease in the amount/types/location of reports. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Pupil Referral Forms; Functional Behavior Analysis reports; Behavior Intervention Plans; OORS reports. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The 2016-2017 Quality Review rated our school as developing for teacher team and leadership development (QR 4.2). The QR found that teachers are in the process of developing inquiry-based teams informed by school goals where student work and data for target students are consistently analyzed. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In order to provide more collaboration amongst and between teachers, teachers will be involved in more inquiry based work looking at student data. Teachers will participate in inquiry cycles during the Monday PD time for the 2018-2019 school year. These sessions will be focused on an area of improvement (for example: number talks, reciprocal teaching, socratic seminar, etc). We have identified 2 model teachers in grades K and 1 who will be working with colleagues on their grades, as well as teachers from partner and host schools (PS 230 and PS 130). The focus will be on English Language Learners. We are hiring a Peer Collaborative Teacher who will work with our Dual Language Spanish teachers. Teachers will be provided with more opportunities to learn from and with each other through self-selected groups/topics throughout the school year supported by per session. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Coaches and APs will meet monthly with teachers to look at student work in reading, writing and/or math to create targeted small group instruction. Classroom teachers and students October-June Assistant Principals, coaches, classroom teachers Coaches will meet with ENL teachers at the end of each unit to review unit assessments, analyze data and support next steps in instruction. Classroom and ENL teachers Every six weeks Coaches, ENL teachers, AP for ENL Teachers will meet with model teachers or Peer Collaborative Teacher to support rigorous instruction for our ELL students. Classroom teachers, Model Teachers, PCT teacher Sept-June Model and PCT Teachers, LPP host and partner schools, Administrators Teachers will lead/create teams to study and implement professional learning based on needs throughout the school year before and/or afterschool. Classroom teachers, coaches September-June Teachers, Coaches, Administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Members of teacher teams will be invited to PTA meetings to present their findings/work from the inquiry process and also share the process with parents. Teachers will use the Tuesday Parent Engagement time, as well as the May PTC to have targeted workshops for parents to around our inquiry topics. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. -Consultants (i.e. Richard Bluttal, Southern Cross Consultancy, Thinking Maps) to support teacher inquiry work. -Per Session and per diem costs to cover teachers who are relieved from instructional duties to analyze data -Salaries for coaches 9  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Teacher PL sessions will have agendas and minutes. Where they are planning, lesson/unit plans/curriculum maps will be submitted to administrators. Administrators and coaches will meet in February 2019 to review data/plans/findings from the PL sessions. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Running records; formative and summative assessments; reading level data; ECAM; teacher created agendas, powerpoints, lesson/unit plans/curriculum maps. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. One of our strengths, based on the 2016-2017 QR, is Teacher Support and Supervision. Administrators provide effective feedback and next steps using student work. We utilize teacher observation data to formulate professional learning experiences aligned to the school goals. Additionally, the QR listed as an area of celebration our high expectations which are communicated to teachers in monthly Administrative walkthroughs. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be evidence that all teachers are incorporating HOT questions in their lessons, and engaging students in discussions such as debate, Socratic Seminar, Grand Conversations in Literacy, Math, and Social Studies lessons. This will be evident by increased Danielson ratings in 3B and 3C. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Monday PD whole school study group using "Thinking Through Quality Questioning" Teachers Sept - June Administrators, Dual teachers trained in Debate and Socratic Seminar will implement it in their classrooms and turnkey to teachers on their grades. Teachers in grades 3,4,5 Sept-June Administrators will provide feedback and create cycles of support after classroom observations to develop HOT skills, academic language, and discussions in classes. Teachers Sept-June Model Teachers (in Learning Partners Program) and PCT will support HOT questions and discussions in lessons Lower grade teachers Sept-June Coaches Dual teachers and their grade colleagues in 3,4,5, Literacy coach, upper grade AP, FSC facilitator. Admisitrators, coaches, teachers. LPP host and partner school, LPP Model Teachers, Peer Collaborative Teacher, lower grade AP 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Two Family Fridays will be focused on class discussions in either Literacy or Math, one in the fall and one in the spring. Parents will receive information from teachers in the September curriculum night about HOT questions and class discussions in Literacy and Math. Presentations (demonstration lessons) will be made at PTA meetings by the coach or select teachers. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. -Salaries for in-house coaches 2  -Per-session for teachers -Per diem to cover common planning time arranged for grade teams -Funds to sponsor events for parents Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In early February 2019, the Principal and two Assistant Principals will meet to review academic progress, review status of SEL program, and reflect on improvement in student engagement by analyzing Danielson data, and soliciting feedback from relevant stakeholders . Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Reading level data; Summative assessment data; Advance data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strong family and community ties is an area of strength for our school. Our proficient rating in the 2016-2017 QR was listed by the reviewer as an area of celebration as the staff consistently communicates expectations connected to Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) to families and gives them feedback towards their child's progress towards meeting them. This is also evident in our increased rating in the 2017-2018 school survey (from 3.08 to 3.16). The lowest rating under Parent Involvement in School was 56% of families say that they've had the opportunity to volunteer time in school. In an effort to engage more of our families we will continue to provide translations in Chinese, Arabic, and Spanish. We will establish class parents in each classroom to support volunteer efforts. Sub Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, PS 24 will provide families more opportunities to volunteer time in school as evidenced by an increase to 60% of parents saying they have opportunities to volunteer in school in the 2018-2019 school survey . 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? PTA will add subcommittees to provide more opportunities for parents to volunteer. Parents Sept-June PTA, Parent Coordinator The School Green Team will expand to include staff and parents to support the School 0 Waste Initiative. Parents, students, staff September - June Every classroom will have a class parent to support volunteer activities including school trips. Parents and Teachers Sept. - June Classroom teachers, administrators, Parent Coordinator Zero Waste personnel, teachers, parent coordinator, community coordinator, administrators, Students on Green Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Center for Family Life in Sunset Park The Healing Center NYU Langone Empire Blue Cross Blue Shield Good Shepard--Family Reception Center The Brooklyn Public Library CASA grant (BAC) Councilmember Carlos Menchaca Assemblyman Felix Ortiz 5  Cornell University Cooperative Extension Grow NYC (Zero Waste Initiative) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. -Funds to pay for parent events -per session and per diem as needed to cover classroom teachers when they plan for workshops -salaries for coaches -per session for coaches to give evening parent workshops -funds to pay for translation services Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Administrators and Parent Coordinator will meet in early February to gauge progress of increase in parent involvement by reviewing data on attendance to events including volunteering opportunities. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent event attendance logs; parent surveys. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Primary Literacy assessment data in English and/or Spanish and/orE/S independent reading level data that indicates a student is performing at least two levels below grade level.Wade assessment data indicating a need for Wilson Language Instruction End of module assessments that indicate a student has not mastered the concept and is in need of further support. ECAM results in grades K-2. Level 1 on 4th grade Science test, students at Level 1 in Science on the report card. Level 1 in Social Studies based on report card scores. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Referral to school psychologist, guidance counselor, Lutheran mental health social worker Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) English/Spanish Guided reading E/S Shared reading E/S Interactive writing E/S word work Wilson Language Instruction TERC Investigations including math discussions and games Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group during the school day Individual and small group During morning routine and regular math period 5 days a week. NYS science curriculum, FOSS kits. Small group work with support teacher Twice a week for 50-minute periods NYC Social StudiesPassport curriculum units of study. At-risk counseling sessions Small group work with other adult or support teacher Individual and small group Lunch clubs Individual Embedded in Social studies lessons. One 50-minute period a week for one-to-one services during the school day 7  by parent and/or classroom teacher. Dental and/or Health-related care Referral by parent to Lutheran Medical 8  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Currently there are 21 students in temporary housing attending our school. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Guidance counselors will provide STH families with an intake package that includes an assessment of immediate needs including the child's age, clothes/shoe size and their social emotional needs. Counselors will facilitate referrals to agencies with in our community to support these families. Additionally, counselors will provide after school services for students in temporary housing with an on-going support group to help them address their personal and family crises and help them integrate into our school community. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 9  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 0  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. PS 24 casts a wide net in recruiting new teachers. We start by spreading the word with our staff and ask them to recommend candidates. We review the new teacher finder list and open market options and recruit through our connections with teaching universities including Bank Street, Hunter College, Brooklyn College, NYU, and Teachers College. In addition, we invite selected substitute teachers and student teachers to interview. Once a teacher is hired, they are assigned a mentor and participate in a wide array of professional development in literacy, math, and social emotional learning. They also receive individual PD from the literacy and math coaches, as well as special school consultants, to help them develop a strong pedagogy. We encourage distributive leadership and capacity building amongst our staff. Teachers are given many opportunities and support to facilitate team meetings and lead PL sessions. Professional Learning is important to all staff members from the Principal on down. The two current Assistant Principals were both classroom teachers at PS 24 and continue to attend administrative study groups and workshops to further enhance their skills and broaden their perspective. We created a Professional Learning Tracker (PLT) to ensure all staff members are given opportunities to enhance their learning. Our ESL and Dual Language teachers have attended numerous PD and other opportunities to exchange professional knowledge and bring back new ideas and approaches. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). All professional development at PS 24 has as its center focus the development of teachers to improve their practice as aligned to the Danielson Framework and the development of curriculum as aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards in order to improve student learning outcomes. Those two frameworks provide the basis and focus for all PD conversations. All Monday PD sessions, Tuesday professional work and weekly common preps are aimed at planning coherent curriculum that engages and prepares students to meet the CCLS. All Academic Intervention Support teachers aim to provide the support needed to ensure that all students have access to and engage with the lesson that their teachers present. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources 1  Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). We will provide Parent orientation workshops around school readiness for families of incoming students especially targeting how to deal with separation anxiety (for both students and parents). Materials will be distributed to support parent/child engagement and develop socialization skills. Pre-K teachers and paraprofessionals attend regularly scheduled workshops to support their practice around early childhood education. Additionally they receive in-house support from an early childhood instructional coach and social worker. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The entire school uses F&P running records, and assessment materials from Schoolwide (Literacy) and TERC Investigations (Math). K-2 teachers also use ECAM. Grade teams will follow the structure of the curriculum units that include rubrics. When administrators meet with teachers to review assessment data, teachers and administrators jointly decide on differentiated strategies to support students’ needs based on the data. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are 2 consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 5D 5A, 5B, 5C 5D, 5E N/A 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E x x x x x Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 539,820 194,704 38,222 0 4,306,472 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs 3   Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 4  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS24 in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 24 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 5  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; 6  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 24, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; 7  ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents 8  Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 9  ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 0  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 1  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Begin description here: 6-8 certified bilingual or ESL teachers will provide supplemental academic enrichment to 100 targeted ELLs in grades 3, 4 and 5 in English including a group of not more than 20 newcomers. We will target our upper grade ELLs who tested at emerging, transitioning and expanding levels on the 2018 NYSESLAT, with the goal of developing students' language and literacy so that they can become proficient in English as measured by the NYSESLAT. We will serve up to 30 students from 3 rd grade who have been ELLs since they entered the school system in Kindergarten, 30 students from 4 th grade who have been ELLs since they entered the school system in Kindergarten and 20 students from 5 th grade who meet that same criteria. We will also serve 20 students in grades 3 through 5 who test as beginners, some of whom are newcomers. Most students who qualify for Title 3 services also qualify for AIS. Qualifying title 3 students, based on the above criteria, who have a scaled score less than 592/ELA and 593/Math in grade 3; 593/ELA and 595/Math in grade 4; and 601/ELA and 598/Math in grade 5 are assigned to AIS. ELL students who are identified for AIS and scored emerging or transitional on the 2018 NYSESLAT are assigned to the Title 3 program. Students will be taught in English in groups of 15 or 20, for 1 hour 50 minutes after school, from 2:40-4:30 on Wednesdays starting on the week of November 7, 2018 through March 29, 2019, for a total of 20 one hour 20 minutes sessions. 3rd and 4th grade students will be in 2 groups of 15 per grade. 5th grade will have a maximum of 20 students in 1 group. Students will receive targeted reading and oral and written language instruction using grade levels texts through the Scholastic Comprehension Book Clubs. Students Running Records will serve as a baseline assessment. Teachers will keep notes on students book club discussions. This model incorporates Nonie K. Lesaux's 4 hallmarks for ELL instruction: engaging texts, academic language, frequent opportunities for writing, and rich discussions. Academic language will be developed using Discussions for Learning which uses art work as the springboard for vocabulary instruction and discussions. Conversational skills will also be addressed through math games in Do the Math. Title 3 records will be kept on file in the Principal's office. This will include student attendance sheets and program notification in the parent's preferred languages. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered 2  Part C: Professional Development Begin description here: At PS 24 it is important for us to provide professional learning for teachers around instruction for ELLs because our school has a high percentage of English Language Learners (48%). We believe it is important for all of our teachers to be able to provide rigourous and effective instruction for ELLs. All teachers of ELLs (38 classroom teachers, 3 ESL teachers, 7 clusters, out of classroom teachers and 6 Title3 teachers) will participate in staff development on site led by our staff. The PL sessions will occur on Mondays during the 80 minute time (2:30-3:50) alloted for staff development on six of the Mondays during 2018-2019. These Mondays are: 12/3/18; 12/10/18; 2/4/19; 2/11/19; 4/1/19; 4/8/19. During these Mondays we will engage in a whole school study group in vertical teams around Nonie Lesaux's book "Cultivating Knowledge, Building Language". Additional Mondays will be used by teachers to engage in inquiry groups. Additionally there will be one vertical team that focuses on dual language issues, and it will be comprised of dual language teachers. Coaches will also cycle their work through grades K-5 supporting the implementation of the Schoolwide curriculum. This professional development will focus on accountable talk for ELLs, and planning and implementing language targets and scaffolds as part of our Schoolwide literacy curriculum which is being led by the coaches and staff.. The six teachers who will teach in the after school ELL enrichment program, will receive additional professional development to be trained in the Scholastic Comprehension Clubs and Discussions for Learning programs by the vendors. These sessions will occur before the start of the afterschool programs (10/31 and 11/1). Records, including agendas, sign in sheets, student attendance will be kept in a folder in the Principal's office labeled Monday PL, AIS and Title 3 2018-2019. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parent Workshops will be held throughout the year to inform and engage parents on the process in which students are determined to be English Language Learners, as well as to inform parents on ways they can support their ELL children. Literacy Coach Maria Diaz and Universal Literacy Coach Valerie Mahase will lead a presentation for parents in which they will be informed of the Common Core langauge proficiency continuum as well as how the Schoolwide literacy curriculum using a workshop model supports their child's learning. This will take place in the October and November PTA meetings. The Parent Coordinator will keep a record of the sign in sheets. Additional workshops for parents will be given by our ENL teachers during the Tuesday Parent Engagement time on 11/27/18, 2/12/18 and 3/26/19. At these workshops, parents will learn what skills children need in order to move to a higher proficiency level or to test out of ELL status. Copies of the sign in sheets will be kept on file with the Principal. Linette Arroyo will provide a workshop to parents that explains how Native Language instruction impacts second language instruction on Tuesday, December 11, 2018. Laura Tiktin-Sharick, AP, will provide a workshop with parents on the language demands in the TERC Investigations mathematics modules so that parents can support their children to achieve in math. Select classroom teachers at different grade levels will be invited to do a demo on number talks--a math initiative in the school introduced by 3 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities our Math Consultant Liz Irwin. All workshops will be offered in both Spanish and English as the presentors are bilingual, with Chinese and Arabic translators present. Parents will be notified of all of these activities through bookbag fliers, posted fliers, and in some cases individual phone calls which will all be in English and the home language. Sign in sheets will be kept with the Principal. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ 0 Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 4  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 15 School Name Public School 24 Borough Brooklyn School Number 24 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Jacqueline Nikovic Coach Maria Diaz , Literacy ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Linette Arroyo Teacher/Subject Area Nydia Mendez, Dual K Teacher/Subject Area N/A Related-Service Provider Judy Loebl Superintendent Anita Skop Assistant Principal Erica Padin & Martin Alvarado Coach N/A School Counselor Gloria Jaramillo Parent Alicia Torres Parent Coordinator Ada Galan Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 3 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program 12 Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 623 5 Total number of ELLs 283 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 45.43%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Yes NoFreestanding ENL Yes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish/English Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 2 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 12 0 0 12 Span K 1 2 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 2 2 3 3 2 2 1 1 2 2 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 1. At PS 24 we use various assessments to determine students' academic needs in both English and Spanish. Incoming students are given a language assessment test (created here at PS 24) to determine language proficiency in both English and Spanish. For newcomers and students entering K we use Concepts of Print. We also use Fountas and Pinnell Reading Benchmark Assessment levels A-Z to determine the reading skills and the reading levels in English. Our Dual Language classes assess incoming dual language students in Concepts of Print in Spanish and an assessment that correlates with our Spanish word study program called Estrellita (phonemic awareness, fluency). We assess students' reading levels in Spanish using the Spanish version of Fountas and Pinnell levels A-N and EDL(Sp. version of DRA) levels O-V in all grades. In addition, we use rubrics (Spanish during Spanish days in dual classes and English on English days). We use only English rubrics in monolingual classes to determine students' writing needs. The students themselves use this tool to assess their own work. Our ELA literacy program (Schoolwide) has curriculum-embedded checklists for every reading and writing unit. What we see on a regular basis 6  is that students who have a strong base in their native language tend to be more successful academically in English than students who struggle in their native language. Our Dual Language Program gives students the opportunity to progress in their native language while developing the English language. They can transfer native language skills to English. Our Fountas and Pinnell reading assessments revealed that our ELLs continue to need support with fluency, decoding, academic vocabulary and using text dependent details when discussing text read. P.S. 24 has a school wide initiative around the Wilson Fundations program to track students' phonetic growth as evidenced in the assessments. The NYSITELL results give ENL teachers and classroom teachers an insight into early literacy skills such as tracking and concepts of print. As we continue to plan and modify our PD for the school year, we will use the data to target specific grade bands. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We have scheduled professional learning days with a Schoolwide consultant to support all teachers on the use of curriculum embedded assessments. Grade teams meet once a week with the assistant principal/ literacy coach and/or grade leader to look at student work and use rubrics to support instructional decisions. We have an instructional lead from the Borough Field Support Center providing professional development to all classroom teachers on how to administer running records and look at miscue analysis. We also have an instructional support coach from the Borough Field Support Office providing PD around Socratic seminar. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our programs for ELLs by closely monitoring the progress of our ELLs, both in the free-standing ENL classes and in the dual language classes. One of the main ways we evaluate the success of our programs for ELLs is by reviewing our NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, Spanish Lab, ELA, Math, F&P reading assessments, Schoolwide end of unit assessments, Schoolwide Writing Rubrics, ECAM, and TERC Investigations summative assessments data. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The majority of students in our classes are making progress from Entering to Commanding proficiencies in NYSESLAT, and for those students who are not making steady progress we are closely monitoring them through our RTI model. We will use our Title III after school program to service our higher functioning ELLs using the Reading Plus program. Our lower functioning ELLs will be placed in an Academic Intervention after school program using the F&P Learning Literacy Intervention program. We will use our Title III Immigrant funds to service grades one and two in an after school program using Comprehension Clubs. A goal for the school will be to continue to look at commonalities and differences between the progress of ELLs in our dual language and our free-standing ENL programs. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our school works with ELLs at a tier 1 level through providing scaffolded and differentiated instruction that prevents students from falling behind their peers. For those ELLs who need more support, as assessed through the Periodic Assessments as well as the NYSESLAT and NYS exams, we provide tier 2 support in the form of small group intervention both in and out of the classroom. Some of our IEP, ELLs, also receive Wilson intervention from our IEP and special education specialists. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. NYSITELL results demonstrated that, 33% of incoming ELLs in are at the entering English proficiency level, 13% are at the emerging proficiency level, 21% are at the transitioning level, 33% are at the expanding level. Based on the NYSESLAT, 2% of first graders are at the entering proficiency levels, 15% are at the emerging proficiency level, 5% are at the transitioning proficiency level, 68% are at the expanding proficiency level and 4% are at the commanding level. In second grade, 0% are at the entering English proficiency level, 21% are at the emerging proficiency level, 45% are at the transitioning proficiency level, 30% are at the expanding proficiency level and 4% are at the commanding level. In third grade, 5% of the ELLs are at the entering English proficiency level, 14% are at the emerging proficiency level, 42% are at the transitioning proficiency level, 33% 7  are at the expanding proficiency level and 6% are at the commanding proficiency level. In fourth grade, 2% of the ELLs are at the entering English proficiency level, 6% are at the emerging proficiency level, 28% are at the transitioning proficiency level, 49% are at the expanding proficiency level and 15% are at the commanding proficiency level. In the fifth grade, 5% of ELLs are at the entering English proficiency level, 10% are at the emerging proficiency level, 21% are at the transitioning proficiency level, 50% are at the expanding proficiency level and 14% are at the commanding proficiency level. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We have an ELL data document on our school's Google drive. This excel spreadsheet includes the current ELLs and former ELLs within each class with their proficiency levels on the NYSITELL/NYSESLAT and their home language. It is updated weekly to include any students that have been discharged and/or admitted. Teachers use this information to plan and make instructional decisions to support ELLs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Freestanding ENL is delivered by three licensed ENL teachers. One licensed ENL teacher delivers ENL instruction for all ELL students in grades K and one in our monolingual classes. There are three monolingual classes in Kindergarten and three monolingual classes in first grade. One licensed ENL teacher delivers ENL instruction for all ELL students in grade two and three in our monolingual classes. There are two monolingual classes in grades two and two monolingual classes in grade three. One ENL licensed teacher delivers ENL instruction for all ELL students in grade four and five in our monolingual classes. There are two monolingual classes in grades four and five. All Ells are placed in an appropriate grade class heterogeneously and are grouped by their proficiency levels when serviced by the ENL teacher. b. TBE program. If applicable. NA c. DL program. If applicable. Currently at P.S. 24 we have Spanish/ English dual language classes in grades K-5. There will be three Kindergarten dual classes, two first grade dual classes, one second grade dual class, two third grade dual classes, two fourth grade dual classes, and two fifth grade dual classes. Two kindergarten dual classes will follow a side by side model and the other a self contained model. The two dual first grade classes will follow a side by side model. One classroom serves as the Spanish world and the other classroom serves as the English world. Two of the kindergarten classes will alternate between the English classroom and Spanish classroom every other day. First grade students alternate between the English classroom and Spanish classroom every other day. The word study Fundations program and Estrellita program is taught every day in both kindergarten and first grade dual language classes. Students in grades two will be in a self contained dual language class that alternates from English to Spanish by day. Students in grades three through five are in self contained dual language classes and follow a half day English and half day Spanish model. Word Study in grades one and two will be done everyday in both languages. Word study in the next day's language happens during last period. In grades K-2, published writing pieces alternate by language. In the side by side or alternating day model, all writing units are taught in both languages until the "selecting" stage. Once students select a piece of writing for publication, the writing period takes place in the allocated language everyday until the end of the unit. In all other self contained classes literacy is taught in both languages equally. In grades K-5 all subject areas will be taught in both languages. Grades will alternate language by day and subject areas. 8  All ELLs in the Spanish/English dual language classes receive ENL instruction from the licensed bilingual classroom teacher. All dual language classroom teachers receive an official ELL list with their students' proficiency levels with the corresponding mandated instructional minutes for each ELL in their class. Students are grouped for small group instruction by the classroom teacher by either entering/emerging, transitioning/expanding and commanding. The entering/emerging groups receive 360 minutes of ENL services, the transitioning/expanding groups receive 180 minutes of ENL services and commanding groups receive 90 minutes of ENL services. ELLs in the dual classes are in grade appropriate classes and are grouped heterogeneously. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? In the monolingual classes, the mandated instructional minutes are met by the ENL teacher. Each ENL teacher incorporates in their scheduled program the required minutes to service ELL students (360 minutes for Entering and Emerging students,180 minutes for Transitioning and Expandin g students and 90 minutes for Commanding students). The school schedule consists of seven 50-minute periods a day. The ENL teachers incorporate the amount of minutes for each language proficiency group using the minutes needed to fulfill the mandated services. For example, an entering and/or emerging student is serviced by an ENL teacher one hour and twelve minutes a day, totaling 360 minutes a week. Whereas, a transitioning and expanding student would be serviced by the ENL teacher 36 minutes a day to total 180 minutes a day. The ENL teacher services small groups of students according to language proficiency levels. At P.S. 24, we have a balanced literacy model. We use the workshop model for instruction in all classes. Instruction is delivered in English in the monolingual classrooms and in English and Spanish in the Dual Language classrooms. The dual language teachers and the monolingual teachers use the ENL program "On Our Way to English" for ENL specific lessons, in addition to balanced literacy. Classroom teachers use ENL strategies to deliver instruction in English such as using manipulatives, expressive language, and total body response when delivering vocabulary, instruction, and/or complex concepts to ELL students. Classroom instruction is also enhanced by color-coding, large pictures, implementing the arts, and constant verbal communication to ensure full understanding and grasp of the lesson. Instruction in all the content areas is often composed of a mini-lesson (link and modeling), active engagement, independent work, differentiated small groups, mid-workshop interruption and a share. All classrooms have rich libraries filled with English and Spanish (in Dual Language classrooms) books in all content areas and topics. Students are encouraged to incorporate turn and talk, cooperative learning, Socratic Seminars and partner work throughout the day. At P.S. 24 we have created a calendar for the Dual Language Program that clarifies our LAP in terms of the language to be taught in the morning and the afternoon. This calendar is followed by all staff and teachers throughout the school, including cluster teachers, guidance counselors, AIS team, and SETSS providers. Mandated instructional minutes are met through providing explicit English as a New Language instructional support through the content areas, Social Studies and Science, Reading and Writing. During the English half of the day in a dual classroom, teachers are required to incorporate English as a New Language instruction through the content areas in order to meet mandated language needs of students (360 minutes a week for Entering and Emerging and 180 minutes for Transitioning and Expanding and 90 minutes for Commanding). Half a school day of English amounts to twelve periods or more of ENL services. The school schedule consists of seven 50-minute periods a day. Dual Language teachers service all the English Language Learners in the class all day in all content areas. Teachers differentiate instruction and have small ENL groups on each level, according to the NYSESLAT proficiencies. ELA instruction is also incorporated into the daily schedule through reading, writing, and mathematics time blocks. The time blocks for literacy and mathematics consist of 60 minute blocks. Home Language Arts (HLA) is done in Spanish during the other half of the school day. English and Spanish instruction, in Dual Language classrooms, are equally divided. 9  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Core content is delivered in both dual and monolingual classes through the Schoolwide Reading and Writing program. The units are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. In dual classrooms, students learn content, math and literacy in both English and Spanish. In monolingual classes, students learn content in English. All classes will be using the Passport Social Studies program which is common core aligned and follows the social studies scope and sequence. In order to make content comprehensible, all lessons include language objectives and content specific vocabulary (Tier 3 words). All teachers provide content area support for ELLs by using scaffolds such as sentence starters, prompts, and rich-vocabulary introductions. Opportunities for oral language development are given to students during the turn-and-talks,small group and during whole class discussions. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? All Spanish speaking ELLs that are placed in Dual Language classrooms are assessed in reading, writing and math in both English and Spanish. In reading we are currently using the Fountas and Pinnell running records for levels A-N and the EDL running records for levels O-V. Spanish writing is evaluated through the use of writing rubrics. Math assessments are also given in Spanish. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status At P.S. 24, instruction for English Language Learners (ELLs) is differentiated by incorporating language objectives and functions of language, such as describing, explaining, identifying, sequencing, planning, comparing and predicting. Students are organized into small groups with the classroom teacher or ENL teacher facilitating student learning. Students are encouraged to use cognates from their native language to make connections in English. Assessments routinely take place when a unit begins to determine the particular needs of individual students. Lessons are modified to target the language needs of students. Students are evaluated during the unit and at the end to ensure mastery of skills and knowledge. The teacher plans lessons and organizes various groupings as students demonstrate learning needs. Within language proficiency groups, differentiated groups exist to build specific understandings and experiences. Student’s prior knowledge, interests, beliefs, how the students learn best, and student attitudes are taken into account when organizing and changing differentiated instruction in the content areas. The learning environment and classroom resources support differentiated instruction throughout the day. Language abilities and acquisition are considered when lessons are differentiated and groups are formed. NYSESLAT proficiency levels are taken into consideration as a measure of their language skills. The four language modalities outlined in the NYSESLAT are a quantitative measure of student mastery of the New York State ENL standards. Differentiation for ELL students reflect student language and academic needs and support learning throughout all content areas. All ELLs and Former ELLs receive assessments, glossaries and test booklets in English and native language. For those students who do not receive a test booklet in their native language due to unavailability, a translator is provided for them. 6a. At P.S. 24, Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE students) are often placed in the Dual Language Program based on parent options and language needs. The teachers in both programs provide small group instruction to support the students in both their native language and new language. Before an instructional plan is incorporated teachers assess students in order to provide the necessary support needed. The instructional plan for SIFE students often incorporates enriching a students' native language through literacy and oral language, while also providing exposure to all content areas. Teachers provide opportunities for students to work in partnerships and expose students to life experiences. Additional support in ENL is also provided to SIFE students in both the monolingual program and the Dual Language program. All SIFE students are encouraged to participate in all P.S. 24 instructional programs. 6b. At P.S. 24, newcomer students are often placed in a Dual Language or monolingual program based on parent preference 0  and language needs. Newcomer students receive standalone ENL instruction in small groups by the ENL teacher when placed in the monolingual program with native language support. They are also immersed in thematic units with strong ENL strategies with their English teachers on English days. In addition, newcomers are also placed in a classroom where the students can receive differentiated instruction and receive support in their native language. Cognates, word associations, and other language skills are taught to students. The Dual Language provides support to Spanish speakers whereas, support for Chinese and Arabic students are provided through ENL instruction. Books and technology are used as tools for learning. Literature in the students' native language is placed in the classrooms to help support student's native language. Often teachers place students in after-school partnership programs to help foster peer socialization and support. Students are encouraged to participate in all P.S. 24 instructional programs. 6c. English Language Learners (ELLs) with 4-6 years of ENL services in the Dual Language program are supported by the classroom teacher throughout the day. The classroom teacher integrates modeling, critical thinking skills, graphic organizers, and thematic approaches to reinforce the skills and strategies students need to master. Visual and audio equipment, along with other supplemental materials, such as Reader's Theater, bilingual dictionaries/glossaries, and guided reading books are used to support lessons and student work. ELLs who have 4-6 years of ENL services and are in monolingual classes are supported by an ENL teacher. Frequently, the ENL teacher pushes into the class and helps support students alongside the classroom teacher. Students participate in strategy groups and are encouraged to use background knowledge in all content areas. 6d. Currently, P.S. 24 does not host any English Language Learners (ELLs) who are Long-Term ELLs, but we have devised a plan for ensuring quality instruction for these students. The plan would include inviting students to the after school Guided Reading Institute we have created here at P.S. 24. Students use a variety of materials and resources to enhance student learning. Small groups would consist of no more than five students. Individual instruction would be considered for students who have not passed the NYSESLAT and continue to receive ENL services after 6 years. The ENL teacher would service these students for the mandated ENL time required by New York State as well as additional periods per week to improve language and academic development. 6e. At PS 24 we think of all our Former ELLs as students still in need of language support. They will continue to get extended time in all of the state and city exams such as Math, ELA and Science during the first two years after scoring commanding on the NYSESLAT. Academic work in reading and writing will include rigorous support with vocabulary, language functions such as transitional phrases and words, syntax, reading comprehension and writing. Accountable talk and all ELL strategies will continue but at a higher level. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The instructional strategies that we use to support ELLs and SWDs in order to promote English as a New Language includes differentiation in all subject areas, strong read alouds, and structured talk/academic discourse to give students the opportunity to speak, synthesize, use metacognitive skills, and effectively execute the English language orally and in writing. We ensure that during turn and talk sessions all students have the opportunity to speak. We believe that every lesson is a language lesson and all teachers in the school participate in professional development strategies geared towards ELLs. Teachers also use dramatizing scenes and vocabulary, picture support, prompts, cognates, etc., to support ELLs and SWDs in every lesson. Total Physical Response, as well as, immersing students in the Language Experience is normally used to develop language with our students. We also implemented Socratic Seminars as a source of improving discourse in all areas. During content area instruction students get to hear vocabulary, ideas, and language on a topic consistently. We will meet regularly to analyze student data and plan lessons that differentiate instruction for ELL and Students with Disabilities (SWDs) selecting specific activities, vocabulary, language structures, and projects our ELLs and SWDs will need. The following materials are used to support ELLs (dual and monolingual setting): web-based programs (Starfall, MyOn, Book Flicks, Brainpop for ELLs ), sequence flash cards, SRA photo library, Benchmark guided reading books, and the F&P LLI kits. Teachers also use Reader's Theater, Time for Kids, and the Wilson Program (all ELLs). The IEP teacher, regularly reviews all IEPs to ensure ELL-SWDs receive all services mandated on their IEPs. 1  7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? At P.S. 24, we use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to meet the diverse needs of our ELLs and SWDs within the least restrictive environment by ensuring that there is proper communication amongst all the teachers providing services. Once a month, classroom (Dual and Monolingual), special education, ENL, and speech teachers, occupational and intervention providers meet to communicate around services provided for students. This aids in avoiding scheduling conflicts and ensuring that students are getting the appropriate services and instruction at the appropriate time. It is also done for collaboration on units of study and themes. During these meetings, key decisions are made such as, push-in or pull out support. Differentiation for learning and grouping children based on need and reading/language modalities is established in these meetings, as well. It is important to be flexible in order to ensure that we are thinking about the whole child and that services meet the needs of the child. These meetings also ensure that all parties involved have the opportunity to communicate with each other so that the student has access to a full curriculum and instruction in all subject areas, as well as, his/her individualized education plan. For students that have Individualized Education Plans (IEPs), all information is shared in these meetings as well as to aid with each service providers contribution. Communication around scheduling is crucial in order to create programs that allow flow and grant access to all services students need. Decisions are also made on whether the students should be grouped homogeneously (e.g. guided reading and NYSESLAT modalities). Our school uses flexible programming by placing ELL-SWDs in ICT classrooms where 60% of students are general education students and 40% are students with disabilities. This allows us to maximize time spent with non-disabled peers. ELL-SWDs are placed in ICT classes based on parent choice, classroom observations, and communication with all related personnel. When there are enough Spanish speaking ELL-SWDs and based on parent choice, we open a Dual Spanish/English ICT class. At PS 24 there is currently one Spanish/English Dual ICT class in fourth grade. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. We will use our Title III after school program to service our ELLs using the Reading Plus program. We will use our Title III Immigrant funds to service grades one and two in an after school program using Comprehension Clubs. Academic Intervention Specialists and ENL teachers work with students in small, differentiated groups in English when necessary. Classroom teachers provide differentiated small group instruction in both English and Spanish when needed. Both academic and language needs are addressed and supported through a variety of lessons and activities. AIS teachers provide English intervention for students who need additional support in ELA, mathematics, and all other content areas. Some of the strategies students work on are decoding, comprehension, critical thinking, and expressive language. Students work on grammar/writing, organization, and word attack skills. Kindergarten, first grade, and second grade struggling, Spanish-dominant students use Estrellita to develop literacy skills. Wilson is used with students in Transitioning and Expanding modalities. Guided and shared reading is used by teachers in either Spanish or English, depending on program child is in, to improve reading skills. Students work in differentiated, homogeneous, small groups during the day. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? At P.S. 24, new programs or improvements for the upcoming school year would be created based on the current assessment of how the initiatives we already have in place are progressing. This year, we have programs in place and plans for other upcoming programs, such as the Scholastic Comprehension Book Clubs. We found that our struggling, long-term ELL students, ELLs in dual language, and for monolingual students scoring a level 1 on the ELA benefit from Comprehension Clubs as it provides support for discourse using academic language. There will also be math and reading groups after school to support our newcomers reading at level J and below and who performed at a level 1 or 2 on the math exam. We will be using a Shared/Close Reading daily approach that will support language development and comprehension. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Currently at P.S. 24 our bilingual program will not be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. 2  English Language Learners (ELLs) are offered equal access to all school programs by invitation, recommendations, and purposeful request. Since P.S. 24, has a high population of ELL students, it is evident that ELLs are welcomed, encouraged, and involved in all school programs. P.S. 24 also has an after-school program called PAZ. Our sponsor for PAZ is the Morningside Center. It offers homework assistance, conflict resolution strategies, and recreation. Students are also involved in the arts, including but not limited to, dance and theater. PAZ is offered to all children at P.S. 24 including SWDs, ELLs, and Non-ELLs. In addition, we have a weekend sports program, chess club, Lego Robotics that all students are invited to. These services are offered to all our students, including ELLs and SWDs. ELLs, SWDs, and Non-ELLs are equally invited and represented in all these programs. ELLs, SWDs, and Non-ELLs are invited based on individual student's needs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. At P.S. 24, the following web-based programs are used to support English Language Learners (dual, and monolingual settings): Starfall, My-On, Brainpop for ELLs, Book Flicks. Other resources that are utilized are sequence flash cards, SRA photo library, SMART interactive boards, Benchmark guided reading books, and F&P LLI kits. Teachers also use Reader's Theater, Time for Kids, and the Wilson Program. In the content area of science, we use the FOSS kits for science that come with all materials in both languages, English and Spanish. For Social Studies, we use NYC Passport Social Studies Program, document cameras, as well as, projectors to display primary sources (pictures, letters, and other sources of information) from the public library, magazines, other resources onto a big screen and used for discussion and thematic projects. This is done in both English and Spanish based on the program the children are in. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is delivered in the Dual Language program in a 50/50 language model. Students receive instruction in both English and Spanish in all content areas. In the 50/50 Dual Language model, students have the opportunity to receive native language support and to be immersed in either an English and Spanish day (half day English and half day Spanish or one day English and one day Spanish dual classes). A student's native language is embraced and nurtured through ongoing classroom activities, providing classrooms with native language literature, and celebrating school wide diversity. In addition, ELLs in a monolingual setting are taught to look for cognates when looking at English texts. Native language materials such as books, glossaries, maps, videos, CDs etc., are in the classroom and the school library for extra support. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Required service support and resources are both grade and age appropriate for our ELLs. All students are assessed on a daily basis and are presented with the necessary materials, instruction, and environment to receive a high quality education. Their birth certificate is used to confirm age. Both formal and informal assessments take place throughout the year in order for classroom teachers, AIS, SETSS and ENL teachers to support all English Language Learners. We use Estrellita (a Spanish word study and phonemic awareness program) to support the native language development for children that have not yet learned initial sounds. Estrellita is used with students in grades K-2 to move them to their appropriate reading level based on the Fountas and Pinnell and Estrellita Assessment. In addition, students in grade two and newcomers that are struggling in Spanish will be assessed using the Estrellita K-1 assessment and will be placed in Estrellita based on their score on the test. Differentiation is crucial in our school where we have many students reading at various levels within a class/grade in both English and Spanish and different modalities in English as a new language. AIS, ENL and SETSS groups are organized based on students' levels within a grade and pull out or push in support is structured so that learning strategies and activities are similar for all children within a group. Flexible grouping is important because some children are ready faster then others and therefore may be ready for more advanced learning activities before peers from their group. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 3  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Students who are newly enrolled to PS 24 are often invited to orientations and open houses. Students and parents are welcomed to come and observe classrooms and other school activities. These events assist students in getting acquainted with the school community. Students and parents are encouraged to ask the Parent Coordinator and other assisting teachers questions about school programs, activities, and expectations. We send letters and put out fliers informing families of these events. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? One of the language electives offered to English Language Learners is the Spanish/English Dual Language Program. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? A. Currently at P.S. 24 we have Spanish/English dual language classes in grades K-5. The children in the dual language classes are heterogeneously grouped so that 40-50% are English Proficient and 50% are Spanish proficient speakers. ELLs and EPs are integrated in all of our dual language classes for the entire instructional day. Two of our three kindergarten dual classes will follow a side by side model and one class will be a self contained, one day English, and one day Spanish. Grade one will have a side by side model. Grade two will have a self contained, one day English and one day Spanish and grades 3-5 are all self contained dual language classes, 50% of the instructional day is in English and 50% is in Spanish. B. In our dual language classrooms all content area is taught in both English and Spanish. Science is taught by two cluster teachers in English. C. Two of the three kindergarten and two first grade dual classes will follow a side by side model. One classroom serves as the Spanish world and the other classroom serves as the English world. Students alternate between the English classroom and Spanish classroom every other day. In one kindergarten class, and in grade two, our dual language classes are self contained and follow an alternating day model that alternates between Spanish and English by day. Dual language classes in grades 3-5 follow a half day model where students spend 50% of the instructional day learning in English and 50% of the day learning in Spanish. D. Both languages are taught at the same time (simultaneous) in grades K-5. 4  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All professional development at PS 24 has as its center focus the development of teachers to improve their practice as aligned to the Danielson Framework and the development of curriculum as aligned to the CCLS. Those two frameworks provide the basis and focus for all PD conversations. All EL PD, Generation Ready, Academic Language & Socratic Seminars with Sylvia Gimenez, Inquiry Data Meetings, Mathematical Discourse with Liz Irwin, Schoolwide Literacy support, using primary and secondary services to support the Passport Curriculum, SESIS special education support by Agnes Martinez, Reading Analysis by Wanda Barbot, building academic language through Thinking Maps and staff meeting discussions are aimed at improving teacher practice. All Monday PD sessions, Tuesday professional work and weekly common preps are aimed at designing coherent curriculum that engages and prepares students to meet the CCLS. On Mondays there is an 80 minute professional development period for all teachers. During this time teachers are receiving professional development on Inquiry Data and were part of an ongoing study group that used the book "English Learners Academic Literacy and Thinking" by Pauline Gibbons as a guide. Also, teachers have received training on the Fountas and Pinnell reading assessments, guided reading and Wilson/Just Words/Fundations phonics curriculum which is a research-based instructional program. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our guidance counselor and parent coordinator attend Middle School Articulation workshops offered by the BNFSC. They also attended the Community School Board meeting where the superintendent and middle school principals presented and discussed the middle school articulation process. At PS 24 all teachers, throughout the school, are educated on working with ELLs. We have veteran teachers that have taken the required 12 hours of ENL training and newer teachers receive Professional Development on ENL and native language support from our Inquiry Group facilitators. All professional development is done with an ENL and ELL lens. During the 80 minute Monday professional development period, all trainings/workshops are done by the literacy coach, trained facilitators and professional development team. ENL instructional practice is embedded throughout all trainings with a specific lens on oral language development. We ensure that all teachers at PS 24 are knowledgeable of the fact that a great majority of our students are either ELLs or former ELLs. Our curriculum throughout the school includes strategies that meet the needs of ELLs in all subject areas. Our Literacy Coach works with all teachers (Dual, general ed. ,special ed.) on a regular basis providing out of classroom and in classroom support. She meet with teachers during weekly grade meetings. School secretary receives professional development once a year outside of the school. In school, all personnel are trained on working with our community parents and teachers on an individual basis and as needed. We keep an electronic google.com calendar of professional development and all PD activity is maintained in this calendar. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? At PS 24 annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs are scheduled during the parental engagement time on Tuesdays. Translations will be provided by school staff. We have a Chinese speaking teacher and an Arabic paraprofessional that assist whenever translation is necessary. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 5  We offer a variety of programs and services to parents of ELLs, special ed. and general ed.at PS 24. There are ENL classes for parents during the week. We often provide classes on nutrition, how to relieve stress, yoga and other kinds of exercises, etc. We conduct a meeting with parents on how to support their children in literacy with ELA and native language development. We have family math days where parents come and learn about our math program and play math games with their students and staff. The last Friday of each month all parents are invited to the school for Parent Reading/Math Day. They get to go into their childrens' classrooms to read with their children or play math games. Afterwards they gather for workshops designed for them on reading, social emotional learning and other topics as they come up. We also have Baby and Me workshops once a month that provides literacy and parenting support to parents. The parent coordinator at the school always meets new parents upon arrival and helps them become acclimated at the school. Staff members in the main office are bilingual to ensure parents get the correct information. Notices, as well as any brochures coming in from central or the school are made available in the parent's home language as indicated on the HLIS survey. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 6 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Jacqueline Nikovic, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 7  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 24 School DBN: 15K024 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Jacqueline Nikovic Erica Padin & Martin Alvarado Title Principal Assistant Principal Ada Galan Parent Coordinator Linette Arroyo ENL/Bilingual Teacher Alicia Torres Parent Nydia Mendez, Dual K Teacher/Subject Area N/A Maria Diaz N/A Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Gloria Jaramillo School Counselor Anita Skop O'Mayra Cruz Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 8  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 15024 School Name: PS 24 Superintendent: Anita Skop The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. To ensure effective communication between parents and PS 24 we have developed a process to identify the language needs of parents and guardians. Since parents or guardians’ preferred language for communication may change over time, we update this information periodically. Admission applications are given to parents in their native language (English, Spanish, Chinese or Arabic). Guardians fill out the Parent/Guardian Home Language Identification survey as part of the admission process. This is a great tool that helps us identify the home and preferred language. A parent involvement survey is conducted twice a year where parents let us know which language they prefer for future communication. We use the Student Emergency Contact cards to assess the preferred language for the family. We also collect data from the ATS report of Preferred Languages, the emergency blue cards, parent surveys at PTA meetings and surveys that teachers send out to the parents. 9  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language According to our data, our parents' preferred languages for both written and oral communication are: Spanish, Chinese, Arabic and English 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Program information and applications, discipline notices, consent forms, complaint forms, notices of rights, and letters or notices that require a response, Monthly calendar, Event and Information flyers, Newsletters, Parent Teacher Conference announcements and flyers, after-school program information, communications from teacher to parents and from principal to parents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 0  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Curriculum night, September 17; Parent Teacher Conference, March 3 and November 5; Family Night, May 12. Attendance teacher conducts telephone outreach to homes of absent students and schedules appointments with parents. Formal and informal interactions with Guidance counselors, Social Workers, Parent Coordinator, Community Coordinator, Family Worker. Conversations between parents/guardians and teachers or administrators. PTA meetings, the third Wednesday of each month; meetings about graduating class events: November and April of each academic year. We disseminate parent-facing documents before each 3 rd week of the month PTA meeting and submit translation requests the first week of each month. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We ensure that notifications are sent home in the language that is preferred by the parents. Our teachers have a list of language preference for each family and send notices home accordingly. Our office staff has the list of language 1  preference from each class and ensures that the right number or notices are distributed to the classrooms to be sent home. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? At PS 24 we assure that parents understand vital information about their child by asking them directly what is their preferred language. We also plan to schedule a focus group of parents inclusive of all cultures and languages represented in our school to gather feedback and best practices on quality and availability of services. 2 
