2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP-CS) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 16K026 School Name: P.S. 026 JESSE OWENS Principal: CYNTHIA CELESTINE 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Jesse Owens 331600010026 Pre-K -5 School Number (DBN): 16K026 1014 Lafayette Avenue Brooklyn, NY 11221 718 –919 - 5707 Phone Number: 718 – 574 - 2803 Fax: Cynthia Celestine CCelest@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Cynthia Celestine Patricia Brown Marta Torres; Michael Sharpe Debra Ellison Lynette Turner N/A Lisa Donlan District Information Geographical District: 16 Superintendent’s Office Address: RaheshaAmon Superintendent: 1010 Lafayette Avenue, Brooklyn , NY 11221 RAmon@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718- 574-2829 Phone Number: 718-574-2834 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Bernadette Fitzgerald FSC: Executive Director:   131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn NY Executive Director’s Office Address: BFitzge2 Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-3954 Phone Number: 718-935-2382 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Cynthia Celestine Patricia Brown Michael Sharpe Debra Ellison Lynette Turner N/A Lisa Donlan Kristina Geddes Diane Benjamin *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Parent   Name Brenda Leonard Burton Andrea Jackson Marta Torres Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Teacher Member/Teacher Member/PTA/Co-President Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission is to engage staff, students, families and community partners to make a difference in the life of each child in our learning community. We will provide all students with an exceptional education to develop their mind and nurture their spirit; empowering them to change the world.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Jesse Owens School is a Professional Learning Community where all students are expected to demonstrate mastery. Instructional leadership maximizes the skills and knowledge of the entire community, including students, staff, parents, administration and educational partners to provide our children with an exceptional education. In collaboration with the 21st Century/ Leadership Program, we maintain high expectations for success and work to ensure that all students - Gifted and Talented, Autism Spectrum Disorder, General Education and Special Education learn. At Jesse Owens, student learning is the barometer upon which we measure the effectiveness of our instruction. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. For the 2018 – 2019 school year, P.S. 26 will continue to host the Gifted and Talented program and will be working at full capacity with three grades - Grades 3, 4 and 5. Specific needs for this program are digital resources as well as tangible books for research and the support of Project Based Learning. The Autism Spectrum Disorder Nest program will be expanding to two additional sections. this means that for the 2018-2019 school year, there will be four sections comprised of the following grades: Kindergarten, Grades 1, 3 and 4. These classrooms will operate as Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT) classes with two cluster teachers who will support the students especially during teachers' preparation periods. Social Development is a focus area for students in the Nest program which is incorporated in the classroom, instructional lunch and cluster times. Each child needs to be given greater access to the curriculum and consistency in receiving positive behavioral supports. 3K For ALL is a special program for three-year-old children. There specific needs are to gain experiences in an environment that will have a strong impact on brain development and learning. The classroom environment will comprise of centers outfitted with materials for the following areas: music/movement, dramatic play, blocks, art, listening, sand/water, writing, math and technology. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Based on the Framework Element scores, the most progress was made in 'Effective School Leadership." There was an increase of .25 points from 2017 (4.16) t0 2018 (4.41). The key area of focus for this school year is "Rigorous Instruction." Although the Framework for Great Schools report shows growth from 4.27 in 2017 t0 4.37 in 2018, an increase of .10 points., our students are performing only at 56 percentile in English Language Arts and 57 percentile in Mathematics. Following are our key areas for focus this school year (2018 - 2019)  Curricula-aligned assessment practices and grading policies that provide actionable feedback  Common assessment analysis that drives curricular and instructional adjustments  Check for understanding and student self assessment that lead to effective lesson adjustment  Design effective lessons to promote critical thinking Increase the quality of student discussion   Academic Language across all disciplines. 0  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 16K026 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 226 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 20 20 13 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 13 13 6 5 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 80.0% % Attendance Rate 79.2% % Reduced Lunch 7.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.3% 29.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 4.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7.09 0% 10% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 56.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 92% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) Yes Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 36 36 13 88.7% 0.9% 21.7% 62.4% 1.8% 1.8% 2 0% 5.1 57.4% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. ● Rigorous Instruction - showed an increase trend from 2016 - 2018. In 2017, an increase of .17 points from 2016 (4.10 to 4.27) and an increase of.10 points from 2017 to 2018 (4.27 to 4.37). Information is based on Framework Element scores. The survey Element Scores showed the following increase from 2016 - 2018; 3.35 to 3.58 to 3.98. Last Quality Review Report in 2015 - 2016 showed Well Developed in the following Indicator: 1.1 Rigorous, engaging and coherent curricula aligned to Common Core; and 1.2 Research based, effective instruction that yields high quality student work. Strengths  Curricular aligns to CCLS, content standards and instructional shifts  Rigorous habits and higher order skills for all  Planning and revising to ensure to curricula and cognitive engagement for all students  Teaching strategies that provide multiple entry points that engage all students Priority Needs Increase usage of academic language across all disciplines verbally and theoretically Improve curricula aligned assessment practices and grading policies that provide actionable feedback    Common assessment analysis that drives curricular and instructional adjustments  Check for understanding and student self-assessment that lead to effective lesson adjustments Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2  By June 2019, all teachers will have engaged students in building and using academic language across disciplines in curricula-aligned pedagogical practices informed by Advance as measured by at least 5% increase on State and City assessments. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Emphasize designing coherent instruction, on-going assessment and progress monitoring during instruction and Units of study in order to adjust the curriculum to meet students’ needs and increase achievement. All teachers ● Provide push-in and pull out services, AIS and RTI services for ELLs and SWDs. Provide counseling for students in temporary housing and monitor their progress. * Vocabulary building across all grades by repeated exposure to cognates, Latin and Greek roots, prefixes, suffixes, antonyms, synonyms in "root of the week" exercises. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers September Coach, Principal and Assistant Principal 2018 - May 2019 September 2018 – May 2019 ESL teacher, Special Ed. Teachers, Coach , cluster teachers and Assistant Principal and guidance Counselor ● Professional Development provided by district; participation in learning networks with colleagues; inter- and intra-visitation All teachers ● Parent Workshops to support students at home with reading strategies and the use of rubrics. All teachers September 2018 - May 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal September 2018 - May 2019 Parent Coordinator, Assistant Principal, Coach, Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will engage families and support their understanding of rigorous instruction and common core in order to support their children at home through a series of 3 workshops conducted by the assistant principal, coach and teachers between fall and spring. Family engagement time will be used to further inform smaller groups and/or one on one with families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 4  The use of Tax Levy NYSTL funds to purchase libraries across grades and vocabulary program. Tax Levy NYSTL Educational Software funding and funds from Title 1 SWD will be used to purchase Reading A-Z packages and vocabulary program. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E X 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. End of unit assessments (6 weeks cycle); Beginning of Year ( BOY); Middle of Year (MOY) and End of Year (EOY) for ‘Reading A-Z’ Reading benchmarks. At the end of each cycle, students should have moved at least two reading levels. Teachers will also engage in monitoring daily on-going/in the moment assessment in addition to monitoring mid-unit progress through data analysis. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Periodic assessments; Pre and Post Unit tests, Quick Sort Tool, self and peer assessments, Summative and Formative assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The Framework Element shows the following consecutive scores over a three year period 2016 - 2018 as follows: 3.80, 3.23 and 3.23. this data shows that scores were stagnant for two years. On the other hand, the Survey Element scores show the following: 3.55, 3.26 and 3.81 consecutively over the period 2016-2018. There has been a positive change of .55 points from 2017 -2018. Strengths Safety (NYC Survey 98% and translates to a score of 4.6o)   A culture of learning that communicates and supports high expectation (Quality Review 2015-2016 ~ 4.99 and a rating of Well Developed. Priority Needs  Classroom Behavior shows a score of 3.23 according to the Framework Elements scores. The NYC School Survey shows a score of 3.13 that translates into 70%.  Make students a part of creating classroom rules;  Purposefully teach students skills related to respecting one another;  Use polite language in interactions with students and encourage them to do the same;  Use restorative practice to give students a platform to speak about resolving conflict;  use Positive Behavior Incentive Support (PBIS) to model and reinforce positive behavior. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students' behavior in the classroom and school environment will show at least 5% positive growth in student interaction with teachers, student interaction with peers in a culture of learning that communicates and supports high expectations as measured by the school survey. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers will participate in Restorative Practice professional development and implement activity in the classroom. All teachers September 2018 -June 2019 Restorative Practice provider & trained staff  All staff will participate in School-wide practice that support Positive Behavior Incentive (PBIS).  All staff will participate in student-led Assemblies All students September 2018 -June 2019 (Tuesday - Thursday). Professional Development on social emotional learning. The school will work to develop norms that can proactively support student learning, classroom behaviors, encourage supportive peer norms and provide next-level guidance. All teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Provide constructive feedback to teachers on Classroom Environment (Advance 2d) to support the academic and personal growth of students and adults. All teachers September 2018 -June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Administrators, teachers, paraprofessional and school-aides (The school community) Administrators Highly Effective Teachers & Professional Learning Committee and External Professional Developers Administrators How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will engage families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment through workshops, Invitation to student led morning Assemblies (Tuesday - Thursday), PTA meetings, allotted parent engagement Tuesdays and scheduled grade level visitation days (three times a year for each grade level). Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 7  A combination of tax levy reimbursable funding will be allocated to pay for: Substitute teachers while teachers attend professional development; purchase essential materials and resources; key personnel will include: school-based administrators; coach, teacher teams and professional learning committee. Title iv Safe and Healthy allocation will support Social and Emotional Professional development. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, teachers will be able to implement at least 50% of the resources, professional development support and constructive feedback to support student's classroom behavior. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Staff communicate and support high expectations to students, increase in tangible incentive, decrease in classroom misbehavior. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on data trends, this framework element is on a positive increase from 2017 - 2018 by .19 points (Framework Elements score) and an increase of .38 points rise ( data derived from Survey Elements Scores) Strengths ● Peer collaboration (100% positive points and a score of 4.99 - NYC School Survey) ● Quality of Professional Development (98% positive points and a score of 4.82 - NYC School Survey) Priority needs ● Cultural Awareness and Inclusive Classroom Instruction (94% positive points and a score of 3.80 - NYC School Survey) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teacher teams will have engaged in collaborative inquiry that supports goals, strengthens teacher capacity and embed distributive leadership structures that influence key decisions as measured by resources from teacher team meetings, agendas and minutes 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Ensure teachers have opportunities to meet at least two times weekly through creative scheduling. Teachers Emphasize the consistent use of programs such RTI, AIS , Push in and pull-out model for ENLs and SWDs. Teachers Provide parents with quarterly progress report highlighting student goals and progress. Teachers Inquiry teams will meet bi-weekly to analyze data and make decision for next steps toward student progress. Teachers September 2018 -June 2019 Teachers, Principal and Assistant Principal September 2018 - June 2019 Teachers, Principal and Assistant Principal September 2018 -June 2019 Teachers, Principal and Assistant Principal September 2018 - June 2019 Teachers, Principal and Assistant Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will engage families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent collaboration through the exploration of data, data analysis and next actionable steps in order to support their children at home. Workshops will emphasize the integration of disciplines by all teachers collaborating with clusters and with each other as evidenced in students’ class work and homework. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Use of SWP Students in Temporary Housing; Title 1 SWP resources will support programs such as RTI and UDL. Tax Levy funding will fund necessary resources for assessment. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 0  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all teachers will consistently develop targeted plans, informed by the triangulation of data taken from on-going, summative and formative assessments, for groups of students and use instructional practices to support students with a variety of needs thus resulting in at least 5% increase in students' overall academic performance. Example of a mid-point benchmark is Reading A-Z middle of the year (MOY) assessment in reading levels. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Reading A-Z, formative and summative assessments, in-the-moment assessment, peer and self-assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Both the Framework Element and the NYC School Survey shows a overall continuous positive rise from 2016 - 2018. The consecutive scores are 3.98, 4.16 and 4.41. Strengths ● NYC School Survey scores show Instructional Leadership at 97% which translates into a score of 4.40  NYC School Survey scores show Program Coherence at 98% which translates into a score of 4.67 Priority Needs ● NYC School Survey scores show Inclusive Leadership at 95% which translates into a score of 4.00 Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders will have made strategic decisions by analyzing data and looking at students' work samples to support the school's instructional goals and meet student learning needs to elevate school-wide practices by at least 5%. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional development provided by Brooklyn North, District and School. All teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Administrators, teacher Leaders Coaches and Consultants Teachers will meet during common planning and inquiry time to adjust the curricula based on student performance. Vertical and horizontal teams will meet to analyze students’ work. Tier II students, ELL and SWDs Every 3 and 6 weeks cycle Students in the bottom third, ELLs and SWD’s Every 3 and 6 weeks cycle All teachers teams and administrators All teacher teams and administrators Teacher observations and feedback All Teachers Every 4-7 Administrators weeks 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Through workshops, Tuesday family engagement time, invitation to external workshops, encourage parents to join PTA, become involved in celebrations and fund raising activities throughout the school year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. A combination of tax levy reimbursable funding will be allocated to pay for: Per diem substitutes as teachers attend professional development; essential materials and resources; key personnel will include: school-based administrators; coach, teacher teams and professional learning committee. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 3  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, school leaders including teacher leaders will create and implement a professional development plan that builds collective capacity from teachers, parents, school community partners and evaluate protocols, adjustments and decisions based on the quality of school level decisions. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher observation using the Advance Framework. Data collection, meeting agenda. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths ● Parental opportunities to engage with the school. ● Data is shared to identify family needs and target appropriate support strategies. Priority Needs ● Strategic partnership that support families and student success. Training and support of staff for developing and sustaining relationship with parents. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will gain at least 5% positive points in parent involvement in school and the use of various forms of communication in outreach to parents as measured by the School Survey. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The PTA and SLT will explore ideas and work with the parent coordinator to increase family engagement in activities and attendance at PTA meetings. Increase workshops on Arts and Crafts, Standards-based curriculum; Shifts in the disciplines; Schedule activities such as Literacy Night and Math Night. Using data to analyze students' progress. Celebrate students at events such as Publishing parties; Awards ceremonies and highlight 100% attendance (both student and parent.) Create yearlong calendar that highlights parent activities and workshops. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents/ Guardians and teachers Parents/ Guardians and teachers Parents/ Guardians and teachers Parents/ Guardians and teachers September 2018 - June 2019 PTA and SLT members and administrators September 2018 - June 2019 PTA and SLT members and administrators September 2018 - June 2019 PTA and SLT members and administrators September 2018 - June 2019 PTA and SLT members and administrators If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. .A combination of tax levy and reimbursable funding will be allocated to fund the following: substitute teachers; essential materials and instructional resources. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 6  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Monthly evaluation of planned activities, sign-in sheets at events and mini survey of parents’ satisfaction and needs should show at least 5% increase in parent participation and parent involvement. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent feedback from workshops, sign-in sheets, increase in parent attendance and parent survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students in the bottom third, Students reading below grade level based on MClass 3D-Reading Students in the bottom third, students who did not make adequate progress based on the NYS Mathematics Test. Teacher referrals, diagnostic, formative and summative content exams Teacher referrals, diagnostic, formative and summative content exams Student behavior, parent request, teacher referrals, diagnostic, formative and summative content exams. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) K-5 Journeys, Guided Reading, Close Reading and Shared Reading and Writing, Non- fiction texts Envision Math, SETTS Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group, one on one tutoring, push in and pull out Service is provided during the school day. Small group one on one tutoring, push in and pull out. Service is provided during the school day. Amplify Small group one on one tutoring, push in and pull out. Service is provided during the school day. Non-Fiction texts Small group one on one tutoring, push in and pull out. Service is provided during the school day. Provide counseling to support at-risk students Small group one on one tutoring, push in and pull out. Service is provided during the school day. 8  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) There are 34 students in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Provide school supplies and uniforms where necessary also provide counseling when necessary. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 9  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 0  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Teaching candidates are hired centrally by the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE). As described in the Consolidated Application, this process ensures that all NYCDOE teachers meet State eligibility requirements. Schools in turn interview teachers to ensure that the teacher is a good match for the school community; that the teacher is Highly Qualified as defined by the ESEA. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional development is differentiated to meet the needs of the teachers. The differentiation takes into consideration teachers’ goals, students’ needs and the Teacher Effectiveness Framework. In keeping with building capacity in the community, teachers attend outside PDs and turnkey to the staff. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA 1  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Our Pre-k and 3K students are using the NYC Thrive Track. Pre-K students will be administered the Early Screening Inventory-Revised (ESI-R) within 45 days of enrollment. Families will receive introduction to Development Screening letters prior to screening. During the school year there are scheduled yearlong activities and celebrations to which parents will be invited. There are also family projects in which parents participate. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. CLASS is an assessment used to assess Pre-K Program and the ECERS-II is also used for Pre-K assessment. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5 Section 5 NA NA Section 5 Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 159,523 37,596 0 0 4,463,998 X X NA NA X 1Explanation/Background: 2  Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities 3  funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 4  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 26 Jesse Owens, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Jesse Owens School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 5  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 6  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Jesse Owens School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between 7  the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. (click to highlight) Rich Text Editor, reply_box_0Press ALT 0 for help SaveCancel I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; 8  ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; 9  ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities 0  Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 1  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? PS 26’s focus on building academic language around content area instruction across all disciplines to promote critical thinking, problem solving and increased students’ progress and performance is well supported by the community school model through academic enrichment classes offered in after school include: Math through movement, Storyboarding, Math Madness, Writers Group, Reading for a Purpose and Science through Art, Yearbook, Technology Arts and Chess. These clubs utilize the Experiential Learning Cycle and lessons in leadership in order to : Augment students skills in self-regulation to be more successful in not only school but in in life. Improve on social and interpersonal skills to create and maintain positive relationships. Increase responsible behavior and improved decision-making across all contexts of a student’s existence Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. GOAL 1: The academic performance of participating students will improve through homework, tutorial, and enrichment services in the content areas of READING, MATH and SCIENCE. Objectives: • Improve student achievement • Reach targeted participation levels in core education services • Reach targeted participation levels in enrichment and support activities GOAL 2: 21st CCLC students will be exposed to and experience a wide variety of enrichment activities which will enhance their learning from the academic program and connect it to the students’ world. GOAL 3: Youth and family Development classes and activities will engage students and parents in a learning environment towards developing positive interpersonal and social emotional skills. Objectives: 2  • Improve student behavior • Retain participation students • Facilitate the social development of participating students GOAL 4: All 21st CCLC activities will take place in safe and healthy environments. 21st CCLC students will increase their knowledge of appropriate social skills, good nutritional habits, and Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? The purpose of this 21st CCLS After School program is to ensure, through our CCLC After School Program, that students will develop and demonstrate scholastic, technological, physical, social, and problem-solving skills essential for achieving academic, occupational, and personal success today and in the future. Family and Community Engagement efforts largely focus on family and community workshops on a variety of topics to support families and their students’ academic achievement and social emotional well-being. Workshops will be either integrated into monthly PTA meetings to inform parents and guardians and to further build the home- school link or in conjunction with existing community Saturday events (such as the District Crawl, etc). Family Engagement workshops include: 1. Effective Partnerships with Your Child’s school 2. Bully or Bystander? 3. Stress-less 4. Footloose- Let’s Dance! 5. Fit For Life PP 42-1-2 Part 2 Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. CBO Partnership: The Leadership Program Target Population: 3  175 students enrolled 5 days per week after school until 5:30 pm in enrichment clubs including: Drama, Martial Arts, Leadership, Robotics, Sports, Dance, Homework help, Music, Yoga. SY 18-19 SMART Goal Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Teacher leader Program Powermylearning Afrolatin Jazz Target Population Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal Teachers and Parents Professional Development Teachers, Administrators, Parents, and Students Professional development for families and teachers Grade 3 and 4 students Teaching of the Arts/ Music/ and Musical instruments By June 2018, teachers and parents will receive professional development in the arts and this will be provide after school activities for students. By June 2018, students and families will be able to use technology as a resource to improve academic academic achievement. By June 2018, students will be able to play at least one musical instrument at a beginner level. Markdegammo Dance Grades 3, 4 and 5 students Dance - Creative By June 2018, to build students creative and expression through dance and develop a journal documenting their artistic and dance experience. Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. NA 4  Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA P/F Set-aside X 21st Century C4E PTA Funded X SIG Grant School Achievement X Other Funding Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. NA Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students NA Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. The school community partners will develop the critical thinking and social emotional skills of all students in a closely collaborative, nurturing environment so that all children can attain high academic standards and become productive global citizens in the 21st Century. p. 43 5  Part 4 a, Key staff and partners A part- time Community School Director was hired CBO partner, The Leadership Program provides 5 teaching artist each day/ 5 teachers working per session 2 days/week each The Dept of Health provides full school visions screening and free corrective glasses to all students who need them. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. 2018-2019 Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 6  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 16 School Name Jesse Owens Borough Brooklyn School Number 026 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Cynthia Celestine Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Iris Torres Teacher/Subject Area type here Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider Superintendent Raesha Amon Assistant Principal Nola Spence Coach type here School Counselor Reginald Richards Parent Marta Torres Parent Coordinator Jessica Jones Field Support Center Staff Member DelMyra Cruz Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification 1 Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 195 7 Total number of ELLs 13 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 6.67%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school will be using the following for 2017-2019 school year: Reading A-Z, TCRWP units assessments in Writing, MOSL in ELA, and teacher-created assessments to assess the early literacy skills of ELLS. This data provides insights on what reading levels our ELLS are and the progress they have made. Data from these assessments will be used to target and provide intervention such as, Academic Intervention Services (AIS) and small groups instruction on the specific skills/areas the students have not acquired or are struggling. Most of our ELLS at this age in the transitional and expanding levels of English Language proficiency seem to be doing fairly well in these assessments as compared to their peers. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Libraries, laptop and computer accessibility 8  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? NYC Performance Tasks and MOSL 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Inquiry group meetings and intervention services, small group and differentiation. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Different assessments and data is used to provide ELLS with Tier 1 research based instructional strategies, scaffolding and differentiated instruction within the RTI framework that will meet students needs and provide academic support. For students that might be struggling after Tier 1instruction has been provided and adjusted or modified to meet their needs then Tier 2 and 3 interventions will be implemented. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The following programs are used: NYSESLAT, MOSL, NYS English Language Arts assessment 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Inquiry Team meetings, grade level team meetings and grade planning meetings Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. 1a. Our ESL program consists of a pull-out model for all the grades and push in services for some expanding and commanding students that need transitional support. Students are grouped according to age, grade, and when the need arises by level of language proficiency. For the school year 2017-2019 a total of English Language Learners will receive English as a Second Language instruction. The program model implemented is Heterogeneous ( mixed proficiency levels ). b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: N/A c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Students are scheduled to receive the mandated minutes of ESL instruction weekly as per CR Part 154, 360 minutes for students in the entering and emerging levels, 180 minutes for the students at the transitional and expanding levels, and 90 minutes for students at the commanding level. Students are grouped by different grades and levels to ensure that all students receive the mandated minutes of instruction. 9  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. ESL instruction follows a multidisciplinary thematic approach where the literacy instruction in English is integrated into social studies, math and science. To make content comprehensible and enrich language development the ESL teacher make use of instructional strategies to develop cognitive academic skills and content concepts and vocabulary ( e.g. presenting information graphically, classifying, comparing and contrasting ). The ESL teacher will align instruction with the common Core Learning standards by designing activities that promote higher order thinking processes in listening, speaking, reading, and writing. A literacy rich classroom where language and learning experiences are embeded in comprehensible input. Planning of lessons using the Enduring Process Model where language and content objectives are integrated to facilitate the acquisition of the academic skills ELLS need to meet the Common Core Learning Standards. Use of research based Scaffolding Strategies to help ELLS acquire higher levels of text complexity skills in language and content learning such as, Modeling, Bridging, Contextualization, Schema Building, and metacognition. ESL instruction follows a multidisciplinary thematic approach where the literacy instruction in English is integrated into social studies, math and science. To make content comprehensible and enrich language development the ESL teacher make use of instructional strategies to develop cognitive academic skills and content concepts and vocabulary ( e.g. presenting information graphically, classifying, comparing and contrasting ). 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Spanish speaking students who are administered the NYSITELL are also administered the Spanish LAB if they are entitled to receive services for ELLS to measure their literacy level in the native language. Students who are literate in their native languages are evaluated in the native language by providing them with available translation versions of tests. When translation versions are not available oral translation is provided by a staff member that might be fluent in the language or the translation and Interpretation unit is contacted for assistance in finding or hiring a translator.English Language Learners who are literate in their native languages also receive native language support by providing them with bilingual dictionaries, and available glossaries in content areas. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. There are no students with interrupted Formal Education ( SIFE ) enrolled at the present time in our school. However, our plan for SIFE students is to provide them with literacy and content areas instruction to help them acquired the skills they need to be on grade level. Instruction will be differentiated in small groups providing also instruction in the Spanish native language by our bilingual Spanish ESL teacher. b. Our plan for newcomers is to provide them with ESL instruction geared to develop their Basic Interpersonal Communication skills ( BICS ) and Cognitive Academic Language Skills ( CALP ), differentiated small group instruction in the regular classroom using scaffolding strategies for ELLS, the use of language software, AIS services, and other school programs. ESL instruction will also be differentiated within the groups with activities to increase English proficiency and develop the academic skills they need to do well in the regular classroom. c., e, Our plan for ELLS receiving service for 4 to 6 years and long term ELLS is to provide them with intensive vocabulary instruction and interventions that will help them to continue developing and sharpening the skills in reading and writing which are the NYSESLAT components where they continue scoring advanced in the test and prevent them from scoring proficient. e. Former ELLS continue receiving transitional support services in the areas of reading and writing for two more years to support them and get them ready to take the state assessments. 0  6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELL-SWDS use the same instructional strategies and grade level materials that are used with regular ELLS but are adapted to their needs using scaffolding strategies for ELLS and modified to the short and long term goals in their IEPS. ELL-SWDS have equal access than non disabled peers to the school's academic interventions, after school programs, Saturday programs, and extra curricular activities such as violin, chess in the school, Exposure program after school, Robotics, enrichment clubs with extra curricular activities, African dance, Activity Works, swimming, Visual Arts and sports. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELL-SWDS have equal access as non disabled peers to the school's academic interventions, after school programs, Saturday programs, and extra curricular activities such as violin, chess in the school, enrichment programs, and sports. Teachers meet at least 3 times to look at students' work, plan and adjust the curriculum to meet individual students' needs. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ELLS who score levels 1 and 2 in the ELA, Math, and content areas tests received small group differentiated instruction in the classroom, and are invited to participate in the after school programs and Saturday programs. The interventions are offered in English. ELLS that are proficient in their native language can use bilingual dictionaries, glossaries, cognates and instructional materials that might be available in other languages. ELLS who scored commanding on the NYSESLAT continue receiving transitional ESL instruction and intervention services for two years or as long as they need it especially on the testing grades. They also receive small group instruction in the classroom, after school programs and Saturday programs. They continue to receive the testing accommodations for ELLS for two years. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? After reviewing our NYSESLAT, ELA, math, and content areas data no new programs will be considered for the upcoming school year since our ELLS have been making steady progress with the program and interventions we have in place. ESL instruction will be aligned with the text complexity and higher order thinking demands of the Common Core Learning standards. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No programs/services for ELLS will be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLS have the opportunity as all students in the school to participate in all curricular and extra curricular programs/activities such as, after school programs, Saturday programs, violin, chess in the schools, Dance, sports, swimming. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. All students have access to a laptop and computers. English Language Learners receive explicit ESL instruction in listening, speaking, reading, and writing using scaffolding strategies for ELLS and the Building Language Proficiency Program. This program is aligned to the common Core Standards designed in integrated content areas thematic units to help students acquired strategies and skills to manage complex texts and promote the acquisition of academic vocabulary . The ESL teacher also uses the following supplementary instructional materials to provide additional support: • Phonics and Friends • Vocabulary in Context Books . Bilingual books 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 1  Students who enter the ESL program proficient in their native languages continue receiving native language support such as, bilingual dictionaries, glossaries, buddy-system, and translated versions of reading/math tests if available in other languages as they become proficient in English through literature in the native language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required services, support and resources correspond to ELLS ages and grade levels because our instructional materials and intervention resources are age appropriate and correspond to grade levels in the school. Age and grade levels are also taken into consideration when grouping the students for instruction and small group interventions. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? English language English Language Learners receive explicit ESL instruction in listening, speaking, reading, and writing using scaffolding strategies for ELLS and the Building Language Proficiency Program. This program is aligned to the common Core Standards designed in integrated content areas thematic units to help students acquired strategies and skills to manage complex texts and promote the acquisition of academic vocabulary . The ESL teacher also uses the following supplementary instructional materials to provide additional support: • Phonics and Friends • Vocabulary in Context Books . Bilingual books 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). For new ELLS that enroll throughout the school year the school counselor has a buddy system which help the students to adjust to the school and have assistance in the classroom. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Not applicable 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The professional plan for all ELL personnel at the school and common branch teachers consists of Co-teaching Models and the ICT Class, ELA and Math Scores, Journeys and Envision instructional programs, Guided reading, Shared reading, D.E.A.R Time, Using Data to drive instruction, Citywide Instructional Focus, Norming/Scoring N.Y.C. Performance Assessment, Looking Closely at Systems and Structures, RTI, Activity Works. Professional development will take place every Monday throughout the school year. In addition some staff members will attend workshops outside the school and turnkey during our Mondays professional development sessions. 2  The ESL teacher will attend professional development offered by the Borough Support Center and the Office of English Language Learners. The ESL teacher participates in school based professional development sessions. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The guidance counselor provide the staff, students and parents with the middle schools directory and assistance with any questions or additional information that might be requested about schools and schools choices. They also coordinate open houses and middle orientations for staff, students and parents in the school and keeps the students and parents informed about middle schools open houses and fairs. The 15% hours for all teachers is addressed during professional development meetings and sessions. The ESL teacher also provides teachers with professional development information on teaching practices, activities, instructional techniques, and authentic assessments for ELLS. The school principal keeps records of agendas, attendance, etc. of all professional development activities conducted in the school. The ENL teacher will attend professional development outside the school to fulfill part of the requirement of 50%. The teacher will keep agendas of all professional development received. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents are invited to attend monthly P.T.A meetings at the school and participate in family Math/Literacy night, assemblies, open houses, and holidays celebrations. The school also hosts many informative workshops throughout the school year such as fire safety, Asthma, CPR, State exams, financial, obtaining the GED, Community Based organizations services available to families. The school has also implemented literacy, math, and assessment workshops not to only inform the parents about the progress their children are making but also to provide them with resources and strategies that they can use to help their children at home. Forms, fliers and handouts are translated in different languages if necessary. The school also utilizes staff members fluent in other languages for oral translations and/or the DOE Translation and Interpretation unit. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents of ELLS are invited to participate in all events taking place, parent teacher conferences, workshops, meetings, etc. The parent coordinator sends home notices in English, Spanish, and any other low incidence language if needed. Staff menbers are available to translate for Spanish speaking parents. For other low incidence languages the Department of Education translation and interpretation Unit is contacted if translation services are needed or requested by parents. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: N/A 3  4 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Cynthia Celestine, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 5  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Jesse Owens School DBN: 16K026 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Cynthia Celestine Title Principal Nola Spence Jessica Jones Iris Torres Mata Torres N/A N/A N/A N/A Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Reginald Richards School Counselor Raesha Amon DelMyra Cruz N/A N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 08/28/17 08/28/17 08/28/17 08/28/17 08/28/17 08/28/17 08/28/17 08/28/17 08/28/17 08/28/17 08/28/17 08/28/17 N/A N/A N/A 6  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 16K026 School Name: JESSE OWENS Superintendent: Raesha Amon The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this (*Primary) conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. P.S 26 determines the primary language spoken by each parent through informal interviews/conversations and by looking at the information he/she provided in the “ethnicity form” during his/her child’s registration. The primary source of this information however, is the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) which is reviewed by the ELL Coordinator of the school in collaboration with the school pupil accounting secretary. If the language spoken by the parent is Spanish our bilingual ELL coordinator and/or our bilingual PTA president will translate for Spanish speaking parents. For parents that speak French or Haitian creole our bilingual Speech Therapist will translate for these parents. For other low incident languages such as Arabic, Bengali, etc. the school secretary, assistant principal, ELL coordinator, parent coordinator or Language Access coordinator will contact the Translation and Interpretation unit to request an over the phone translator for these parents. The school’s pupil accounting secretary records and maintains this information in each student’s cumulative folder (copies of the HLIS and the ATS generated notice of admission –QADM) and also the school’s file of emergency cards for each class. Also at the beginning of each school year the ELL Coordinator and the Language Access Coordinator compiles a list of 7  students whose parents need oral and/or written translation in a language other than English. The list is readily available in the main office for easy access. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Parents' preferred languages for both written and oral communication are English and Spanish. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. School calendar, Curriculum Night, Parent-Teacher conferences, PTA meetings, Breakfast with the Principal, Saturday Programs. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 8  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Curriculum Night - September Parent-Teacher conferences - November, March Promotion in Doubt Meetings - January, February Guidance Counselor reaching out to parents regarding the Middle School Application 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Welcome Poster is placed on a prominent location where it will be visible to all visitors that come inside the school building. Parents will be provided the Parents' Bill of Rights and the Parents' Guide to Language Access. For any parent that indicates the need of translation services on the Language ID Guide the Translation and Interpretation Unit will be contacted starting with the security officer at the security desk, personnel in the main office, the Parent Coordinator, the Language Access Coordinator Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services 9  Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The school will review the responses provided by the parents on the parent surveys to determine if any adjusments or changes need to be made to our procedures to provide Translation and Interpretation Services to parents. 0 
