 32K045 School Name: P.S. 045 HORACE E. GREENE Principal: NADINE MARSHALL   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information HORACE E. GREENE 333200010045 PK-8 School Number (DBN): 32K045 84 SCHAEFERSTREET, BROOKLYN, N.Y. 11207 718-642-5360 Phone Number: 718-574-1043 Fax: nmarshall@schools.nyc.gov Nadine Marshall School Contact Person: Email Address: Nadine Marshall (Acting Principal) Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 32 Superintendent’s Office Address: Superintendent’s Email Address: MICHELLE BROADY TIFFANY BLANDING Deborah Augustin NatashaIsrael N/A N/A ANDRE THOMPSON District Information MRS. SHEILA GORSKI Superintendent: 797 BUSHWICK AVE., BROOKLYN, NY 11221 (RM: 300) sgorski@schools.nyc.gov 718-574-1000 x364 718-574-1245 Phone Number: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   BROOKLYN NORTH BERNADETTE FITZGERALD FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 131 Livingston St., Brooklyn, NY 11201 bfitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-3954 Phone Number: 718-935-2382 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Nadine Marshall (Acting Principal) Michelle Broady Tiffany Blanding Bonnie Bell Natasha Israel Andre Thompson AngelisRoberts LaShawn McLaurin Marcel Morgan *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent   Deborah Augustin Patricia Edwards Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/CSA Member/UFT Member/UFT Member Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? MISSION STATEMENT Section 4: CEP Overview The Horace E. Greene School-P.S./I.S. 45K, working in partnership with parents and the community, will create a society of lifelong learners. We will develop a community of responsible citizens who respect one another and themselves. Demanding excellence in the performance standards of student literacy, mathematics and science will insure that our students are prepared to meet the challenges of the twenty-first century.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The student body at our school is 43% Black, 50% Hispanic, 3% Asian, 3% White and 1% Other. Of our 688 enrolled students, 16% (110) are English Language Learners (ELLs) and 18% (122) are students with special needs. At the Horace E. Greene School, we envision that our students will develop appropriate decision making, critical thinking and technological skills that will provide them with the ability to communicate effectively. Staff and parents are focused on empowering all students with the academic skills and social experiences that will enable them to increase their educational and social goals. Students will become responsible, active, contributing members of society. All members of our community are learners who actively engage in the educational process. The school community will share accountability for creating a positive and supportive educational environment, which will result in every student achieving successful outcomes and attaining leadership qualities Instructional practices and curriculum are closely examined as a school to identify the common trends across all grades. This work helps to inform the changes that are necessary in the curriculum and/or professional development plan. Upon analyzing our student performance on the NYS ELA and Mathematics Assessments, we identified a common trend across testing grades and subgroups. Based on the data our students were deficient in CCLS RL.1 for both Literature and Informational Text. We discovered that it was necessary for our students to engage in reading activities requiring students to cite text-based evidence, distinguish between relevant and irrelevant details, and draw inferences from the text. As a school, we are focusing on improving our instructional curriculum and practices to guarantee that all students learn at high levels to master all content area standards. To ensure alignment of a standard-based curriculum embedded in rigor, professional learning will be developed based on student performance and trends from teacher observations supported by the Danielson’s Framework for Teaching. The intended outcome of such goals is to fully align instruction to the CCLS and to make a positive impact on students’ academic growth in both literacy and mathematics. For example: the math curriculum in grades K-5 was changed fully from envision Math to New York State Common Core Mathematics Curriculum – A Story of Units in grades K-5. Based on our math testing data, an in depth overview of the tested standards and the alignment with the standards, we agreed that the program would provide our students with a deeper conceptual understanding and a focus on application based problems. The school community examines and tracks the following to understand success towards these goals by:  *Engaging in frequent cycles of observations and provide timely actionable feedback to teachers to strengthen instructional practice  *Using the READY ELA/Math assessments and monthly tasks for instructional grouping  *Teacher teams meet regularly to analyze student work and make adjustments to curriculum and lesson plans  *Teachers and administrators of grades 2-8 analyzed the item analysis of both ELA and Math to identify student gaps and trends. The findings showed that questioning in the classrooms were not aligned to the CCLS and that students were not provided with ample opportunities to engage in classroom discussions.  *Teachers and administrators of grades K-2 analyze Fountas and Pinnell and DIBELS data to identify student gaps and trends. 0  Findings: students struggle with CCLS RL.1 and instructional shifts in literacy (3, 4, 5 & 6) Reading and writing grounded in evidence from text and Regular practice with complex text and its academic vocabulary and instructional shifts in Mathematics (3, 4, 5 & 6) fluency, deep understanding, application and dual intensity.  There was a heavy emphasis on informational text (non-fiction literacy)  There was an emphasis on students capability to infer and draw conclusions from complex text  Questioning and discussion techniques based on text-based evidence The school community has undertaken the following initiatives to impact the effectiveness of structures for improvement:  *Articulate with all teachers of grades K-8 the focused standards and instructional shifts that are to be addressed, revisions to be made in curriculum and professional development that will be provided to strengthen instruction.  *Align observational cycles to track and monitor the effectiveness of instructional practices using Danielson Framework for Teaching – Domains 1 (Planning) and 3 (Instruction)  *Strengthen ELA and Math instruction in grades 2-8  *Implement Reciprocal Teaching Classroom Discussion Strategies during literacy and social studies We have a safe and inclusive school culture to support the academic and social growth of all students by instituting the following initiatives:  *Student Council – student representatives are elected to provide student input on school issues and events.  *The Professional Learning Committee developed a PD Plan on results of Teacher Needs Survey. The committee facilitates the PD and schedule PD with consultants as needed. Teachers who attend complete a Professional Development Response Form listing the ways in which they will share the information with their peers.  *Value of the Month – Each month a value is posted and discussed throughout the school community. The monthly values focus on character development and how such values are essential to becoming a productive citizen. Teachers read books aloud to students where characters demonstrate the value. (Fitness and the Arts)   Community Service (Grs. 6-8)   Champs Fitness Program (Grs. 4 and 5)   SASF – Sports and Arts in Schools Foundation (Grs. 5-8)   Boys Scout (1-5)   Middle School Arts Initiative   Music in the Brain (PK-2)   Swim For Life (Gr. 2)   FyreZone (Grs. 5-8)   Inside Broadway (Gr. 2)   LEAP – ELL classes (Grs. K-4)  Chess (Grs. 3-5)  Dance Theater of Harlem (Grs. 3-5)  Meatless Mondays 1  (Career and College Readiness)   Attendance Incentives – Adventureland, Theater, Connecticut Trips and Monthly Recognition   High School and College Visits (College Assess for All)   Bridging the Gap STEP – NYC College of Technology (Grs. 6-8)   Pricewaterhouse Cooper’s, Financial Literacy Program – (Grs. 6-8)   Safety City – (Gr. 3)   Character Development – (School-wide)   LEAP Entrepreneurship Program – (Gr. 5) 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. At this time, eighty-eight (88) students not living in permanent homes. Of the eighty-eight students, forty-one (41) live in shelters, forty-four (44) double up with other families and three have other living. We have families travelling from Queens and the Bronx. To support English Language Learners and Students With Disabilities the following will be put into to place: Inclusive, Collaborative Planning: Teachers will work with out of classroom personnel, such as the SETSS and ESL service providers, while planning the interdisciplinary unit plans. These individuals will help identify multiple entry points for ELLs and SWD students. Push in and pull supports for the students in these subgroups will be provided. SETSS providers will host a workshop series for special education teachers on how to write quality IEPs. During this time, providers will meet with teachers to review the components of the IEP and receive assistance in determining appropriately challenging goals. The providers will support students within these populations with language and vocabulary development. Students will also engage in a variety of mathematics activities where manipulatives will be utilized to further students' understanding of concepts. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. During this school year, we focused on all elements of the Framework for Great Schools. Teachers and staff worked together during Monday’s 80-minute Professional Learning sessions. Teachers supported each other through lesson study, analysis of student data, developing performance tasks, demonstration lessons and constructing objective and valuable feedback based on the Danielson’s Rubric. The Professional Learning Committee collaborated with administration, facilitated learning, provided classroom support and analyzed teacher feedback. This year we provided families with more opportunities to engage in learning. Families came out to continue learning on the Common Core Standards. Families worked on literacy and mathematics tasks with teacher support for better understanding of what their child (ren) are doing in the classroom. We also had a number of community supports come into the school: Dentist, Vision, Saratoga Library, 83rd Precinct, Firehouse, etc. Our key areas of focus for this school year continue to be Rigorous Instruction and Supportive Environment. We will analyze the incoming testing data and make instructional adjustments where needed. We will continue to put practices in place to support the entire school community. The classrooms of teachers will be monitored to provide all learners with environments that will assist in advancing their learning throughout the school day. 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 32K045 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08,SE Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 681 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 43 43 15 11 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 76 65 8 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 82.0% % Attendance Rate 80.0% % Reduced Lunch 16.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.2% 49.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 13.17 0% 10% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 35.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 83% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 30 30 91.8% 1.5% 18.4% 42.6% 2.9% 1.2% 6 4% 8.3 28.6% 54% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A NO NO YES N/A N/A NO NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Progress in English Language Arts and Mathematics is a continued priority within our school. The following reflects reports from the ’17-’18 School Quality Guide, the NYS Report Card and analysis of the June Instructional Data Student Achievement: We are still awaiting testing data When looking at the Areas for Improvement from recent Quality Review and feedback contained from the Principal Performance Observation as well as ADVANCE and the School Survey, the school needs to work on the following to support student academic growth:  Improve teaching practices so that lessons reflect the consistent use of adequate scaffolds, interactive learning tasks and lesson adaptations to challenge and push thinking of all students; English Language Learners, Students with Disabilities and Academically Advanced. Strengthen assessment practices, including self-assessments and ongoing checks for understanding   Use assessment data to make adjustments to instructional decisions and provide clear next steps     Strengthen planning of academic tasks based on student data Improve on teachers’ development in ADVANCE Domain 1 – Planning and Preparation and 3 – Instruction Improve teachers' feedback to students orally and written. Strengthen questioning and discussion Provide instructional staff with professional learning focused on the following standards:   Literacy CCRA. RL1 – Read closely and cite evidence to determine what the text says explicitly and to make logical inferences from it Literacy CCRA.W1 – Write arguments to support claims in an analysis of substantive topics or texts, using valid reasoning and relevant and sufficient evidence.  Mathematics MP.1 – Make sense of problems and persevere in solving them Other data to be analyzed throughout the school year:  Analysis of Fountas and Pinnell reading levels  Results in Practice ELA and Math assessments  Reading and Writing logs  Conferencing 4  As per the '17-'18 PPO Feedback Report, QR Indicator 2.2 is an area of focus Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students in grades 3-8 will engage in Common Core aligned instruction across all content areas incorporating evidence based arguments to strengthen discussion that will transfer into stronger writing in all curriculum areas. As evidenced by 65% of the students demonstrating one level of growth in performance in English Language Arts that requires students to justify reading, writing and discussion in evidence from text. (QR 1.1/DTSDE 4.5) 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Sept. ’18 to June ‘19  Principal  Assistant Principals Staff Developers  Professional  Learning Committee (PLC) The administration will Provide Teacher Teams with scheduled times to meet: two 45-minute collaborative team meetings during the week and 35-minute Tuesday sessions. Classroom Teachers The members of the Professional Learning Committee will facilitate Professional Learning on Mondays where teachers will have opportunities to acquire knowledge in personal areas of need. Focus will be on: Unpacking the Next Generation ELA standards to support performance task development which will embed the speaking and listening standards. Question and Discussion protocols Implementation of Reciprocal Teaching Strategies SETSS Providers ESL Providers **Questioning **Clarifying **Summarizing **Predicting Administration, Instructional Team and PLC will meet twice a month to engage in analyzing unit and lesson plans to identify tasks that are differentiated for ELLs, SWDs and academically at-risk students. Classroom Sept. ’18 to Teachers June ‘19 Clusters  Administration  Staff Developers  Professional Learning Committee SETSS Provider  6  During the meetings an overview of programs to support students’ individual needs will be assessed: Wednesday and Thursday After-school Institute Thursday After-school for Problem solving  ENL/ESL Provider LEAP for ELLs and SWDs Imagine Learning for ELLs HEADSPROUT for ELLs and SWDs BrainPop for all sub-groups NYSESLAT materials i-Ready Reading Professional learning opportunities will be implemented throughout the school year to address the needs of English Language Learners and Students With Disabilities. Classroom Sept. ’18 to Teachers June ‘19 Teachers will be identified by instructional needs based on observational data to attend learning opportunities offered by Brooklyn North during the school year. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement  Administration  Staff Developers  Professional Learning Committee SETSS Provider   ENL/ESL Provider  Brooklyn North How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Conduct Parent Workshops demonstrating the following implemented activities: a. Shared reading and math blocks b. ELA and Math standardized test formats and ways to assist children c. NYSESLAT test format and ways to assist children d. Explanation of NYS report card and School Quality Snapshot – at monthly SLT/PTA meetings e. Parent orientation and engagement meetings 7  *During these meetings classroom teachers will discuss and explain yearly educational goals, curriculum, classroom procedures, support activities, etc. Parent Workshops will also focus on differentiated instructional activities. To support parents at home with informational text, Time For Kids is sent home to share Social Studies and Science content. Informational texts is also available for families via e-books. Brain Pop is also accessible at home throughout the school year. Supportive Personnel · Principal · Assistant Principals · Parent Coordinator · Paras. (for translation support) · PTA Executive Board · District Parent Liaison Timeline Sept. ’18 to June ‘19 Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. (EngageNY) Singapore Math i-Ready Software in Reading and Mathematics Ready Instructional and Practice Student Workbooks Imagine Learning NYSESLAT supplemental materials LEAP – Educational Consultants Purchase of Technology (document cameras, promethean boards, laptops) Per Session for Thursday Math Institute - October 4-December 20 Ten 90-minute sessions (2:30-4:00 p.m.)/Ten teachers/Students of grades 3-8 Per Session for Curriculum Development Per Diem for Teacher Professional Development off-site 8  Per Diem cost of $164 per substitute for classroom teachers attending professional learning off-site Purchase of supportive literature Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By December 21, 2018, 25% of students will increase their performance by one level on the constructed and extended responses of the NY Ready benchmark assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) The following instruments will be used to measure progress:  The New York State English Language Arts Test  MOSL (NYC Performance Task) Fountas and Pinnell (Dibels 3D)  i-Ready assessment data   Bi-Monthly Performance Task data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based on data from the 2017-2018 student state performance in ELA and Mathematics the following performance indicators displayed success in regards to attendance: Students with 93%-100% attendance in the '17-'18 school year showed progress on state exams   Outreach to parents of chronically absent students was increased throughout the school year Based on data from the 2015-2016 School Quality Snapshot, the following performance indicators need to be the focus in regards to attendance: Increase the percentage of yearly attendance from 91.8% to at least 93% by June 2019 Increase the attendance of chronically absent students (36% of students with less than 90% attendance) Work with families of chronically absent students and those in temporary housing Increase attendance of Early Childhood students PK, K and 1 and parents/guardians at workshops Use of a variety of methods to communicate with parents/guardians on the importance of children attending school regularly (workshops, fairs, emails, progress reports, telephone relay, etc.) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers and support staff will utilize the resources and organizational decisions to support chronically absent students with at least a 3% increase in attendance when compared to 2017-18 attendance data (QR 3.1/DTSDE 5.4). 0 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Chronically absent students Students in Temporary Housing Staff September 2018  Administration  Parent to June 2019 Coordinator  Attendance Team which includes the District Attendance Teacher  Guidance  Dean   SAPIS Worker SBST Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  The Dean, SAPIS worker and Guidance Counselor will continue the implementation of the Character Development Program that was introduced three years ago. Our Character Development program is a deliberate effort to grow good character tools based on core virtues. Good character consists of knowing the good, loving the good and doing the good – habits of the mind, habits of the heart and habits of action. The main goal is to develop within the students a “Self-initiated Inner Value Check-List” that will enable them to make positive decisions when they face a dilemma. They will learn how to assess the “Levels of Dilemmas”. This assessment piece is imperative to the student, to know the difference between when to make a decision on their own and when they need the help of a responsible adult. What is needed: SHIFT 4: Text-based Answers: Students have rich and rigorous conversations which are dependent on a common text. Teachers insist that experiences stay deeply connected to the text on the page and that students develop habits for making evidence-based arguments both in conversation, as well as in writing to assess comprehension of a text. 1  How we fulfill this need: The use of the text to facilitate guided discussion to catapult into role-play, skits and monologues, to draw out the value of the month as its core. What is needed: Domain 3: Instruction 3a Communicating with Students 3b Questioning and Discussion Techniques 3c Engaging Students in Learning How we fulfill this need: The students are given multiple opportunities to discuss, positively argue and debate their ideas with the core value of the month. What is needed: Domain 2: Classroom Environment 2a Creating an Environment of Respect and Rapport 2b Establishing a Culture for Learning 2d Managing Student Behavior How we fulfill this need: We constantly build and develop an environment in which all students feel safe and comfortable to express their opinions. They also understand that the boundaries for expression must be sifted through the filter of respect for all; other races, religions, cultures, and gender identifications. Attendance Team will engage in monthly analysis of ATS and DSS attendance reports to identify students who attend school less than 90% of the month Attendance Team will work with District Attendance Coordinator to develop procedures, activities and incentives to increase student monthly attendance School administrators, Attendance Coordinator and Attendance Team will facilitate Parent Workshops in October, January and April on Attendance and its impact on student achievement and promotion The PLC and support staff will provide all instructional staff with Professional Learning in the area of differentiated instruction for ELLs, SWDs and academically at-risk students throughout the school year. Teachers of Chronically absent students Teachers will be trained throughout the year in the implementation of programs to support students’ individual September 2018 to June 2019  Administration  SETSS Providers  ENL/ESL Provider 2 needs. Schedules will be created to include in the Flow of the Day.  Thursday Mathematics Problem Solving After-school (Oct.-Dec.)  Wednesday & Thursday After-school Institute (Jan.-Apr.) LEAP Imagine Learning    HEADSPROUT  BrainPop  NYSESLAT materials  i-Ready Reading and Math There will also be an implementation of programs to support middle school students: Male/Female Initiatives Thursday Teen Night College Access for All  Professional Learning Committee  Program Consultants Students in Temporary Housing Students with crisis behavioral issues ELLs SWDs The implementation of the Character Development Plan will include engaging all staff in professional learning around All Staff September 2018 Culturally Responsive Teaching: Practical examination of the relationship between culture and cognition. to June 2019  Administration  District Teacher Development and Evaluation Coach Teachers will overview Danielson's component 1b - Knowing Your Students. This will help each of them design tasks to meet the needs of all students and understand their learning capabilities as well as understand their cultural differences. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Communication with parents will be through newsletters, telephone outreach, e-mails, letters, bulletins, questionnaires and surveys. All information will be available in translated versions as needed. (Families will be provided with proper notification well in advance of scheduled activities) The purchase of DATACATION and Teachease which will further provide parents with immediate information on child's attendance. School events will be planned: Parent Workshops, Health and Academic Fairs, Theater Trips, PTA meetings, SLT meetings, Parent Teacher conferences, Meet Your Child’s Teacher Special activities (i.e. assemblies, fairs, and parent/student) will involve families throughout the year in positive interactions. 3  School and parent coordinator will work collaboratively with District Parent Office to support parent/guardian concerns and needs. The school will conduct Parent Workshops demonstrating the following implemented activities: a) ELA and Math standardized test formats and ways to assist children b) NYSESLAT test format and ways to assist children c) Explanation of NYS report card and School Quality Snapshot d) Parent orientation and engagement meetings During these meetings each classroom teacher discusses and explains yearly educational goals, curriculum, classroom procedures, support activities, etc. Supportive Personnel · Principal · Assistant Principals · Parent Coordinator · Paraprofessionals (for translation support) · Attendance Team · Guidance · SBST · PTA Executive Board · District Parent Liaison Timeline September 2018 to June 2019 Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Purchase of Technology (document camera, laptops) Purchase of DATACATION program Per Session for Translation support Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 5th 2019 , there will be a 2% reduction of chronically absent students as indicated by the attendance reports in ATS. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 4   Attendance of parents of chronically absent students at monthly meetings and/or telephone conversations  Record of monthly attendance meetings where there will be an overview of attendance data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on 2017-2018 observations with the Danielson’s Rubric the following are areas of strength:  There was an increase of teachers achieving MOTPs of Effective.  There was an increase of teachers showing improvement in Domain 1 - Planning and Preparation  Workshops focused on Domain 1 of ADVANCE have supported the growth in teacher's lesson plan structures Based on 2018-2019 observations with the Danielson’s Rubric and the May PPO the following are areas of concern: ● Instructional staff needs continuous support in the areas of Domain 3-Instruction: Components 3b – Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques, 3c – Engaging Students in Learning and 3d – Assessing Students Learning. ● Staff must strengthen the use of student data to plan academic tasks so that lessons promote rigorous habits, high levels of thinking and cognitive engagement for all students . ● Promote consistency in the use of instructional strategies that provide multiple entry points into the curricula so that lessons fully challenge thinking to improve student learning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of instructional staff will have participated in professional collaborative learning to strengthen pedagogical expertise in analyzing student data, development of rigorous tasks which are modified for groups of students in all curriculum areas, ensuring all students have access in the lesson and making adjustments to instruction as measured by ADVANCE data from formal and informal observations (QR 4.1/DTSDE 2.4). **Focus will be on components of Danielson’s Rubric Domains 1: Planning and 3: Instruction 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 1. Peer Intervisitation will be implemented to support the individual needs of teachers. This system will be designed by collaboration amongst members of the Professional Learning Committee which includes administration and classroom teachers so visits are scheduled for classroom visits. Teachers Paras 2. To improve teacher pedagogy staff developers and the ULIT Coach will work together. They will disaggregate teacher/student data to develop key categories identified to align a series of professional learning opportunities: Close Reading, Guided Reading, Differentiation, Multiple Entry Points, Questioning fostering Student Discussions, English Language Learners and Students With Disabilities. Inclusive, Collaborative Planning: Teachers will work with out of classroom personnel, such as the SETSS and ESL service providers, while planning the interdisciplinary unit plans. These individuals will help identify multiple entry points for ELLs and SWD students. Push in and pull supports for the students in these subgroups will be provided. SETSS providers will host a workshop series for special education teachers on how to write quality IEPs. During this time, providers will meet with teachers to review the components of the IEP and get help determine appropriately challenging goals. Classroom teachers of ELLs Special Education Teachers ICT Teachers Clusters Special Education Teachers ICT September 2018 to June 2019  Administration  Staff Developer  ULIT Coach  Supports from Brooklyn North  Outside Consultants September 2018 to  Administration  Professional June 2019  Learning Committee Supports from Brooklyn North  Outside Consultants September 2018 to June 2019   Administration  SETSS Teachers Supports from Brooklyn North 7  3b – Parent and Family Engagement Teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Strategies to promote teacher-parent collaborations to improve student achievement: Host parent orientation in September – where teachers will discuss and explain the yearly educational goals, curriculum, class/school protocols and procedures Hold an annual Title I Curriculum meeting Host educational family events/activities throughout the school year Encourage meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Team and Parent Teacher Association Encourage more parents to become Learning Leaders Provide written and verbal progress reports informing parents of student progress Distribute a monthly newsletter informing parents/guardians of school events, classroom instruction and pertinent information from DOE Conduct monthly workshops for parents/guardians hosted by Parent Coordinator, Administration and/or Teachers Supportive Personnel  Principal  Assistant Principals  Universal Literacy Coach  Parent Coordinator  Paraprofessional (for translation support)  PTA Executive Board  District Parent Liaison Timeline October ’18 to June ‘19 Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. To provide teachers with support in the evaluation process Charlotte Danielson’s book: Enhancing Professional Practice: A Framework for Teaching will be used 8   Title I SWP – Purchase of materials to support Danielson’s Rubric Components Enhancing Professional Practice: A Framework for Teaching and the Common Core Flip book focused on standards and strategies Curriculum and Staff Development Consultant Contracts Creative Solution Services Teq – Smartboard Orton-Gillingham Design Team/Professional Development Committee Title I SWP – Purchase of materials to support Competencies 3a and 3b: Enhancing Professional Practice: A Framework for Teaching and Looking Together at Student Work; Teacher Per Session for training TL Data Specialist – per session for administrator Core Curriculum Support – per session for teacher Using elements of Danielson’s as protocol for inter-visitation Scheduling during the school day for feedback sessions Development of pacing schedule Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 4th, 2019 50% of teachers will show an improvement in their identified area growth and need in Domain 3:Instruction of the Danielson rubric as evidenced by their ratings in the ADVANCE system. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instruments of measure that will be used to assess progress:  Formal and Informal Observations that are entered in the ADVANCE system. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on 2017-2018 NYC School Survey and PPO: School leaders facilitate a culture of high expectations via effective professional development and a set of academic and personal behaviors promoted across the school. School leaders effectively organize resources and time toward building teacher capacity School leaders provide time for collaboration among teachers supporting the school’s instructional goals Based on 2017-2018 data and administrative team’s observations the following needs to be a continued focus: Increase intervisitation opportunities for instructional staff across grades and schools in District 32 Provide all staff members with professional learning facilitating opportunities Develop Lab Sites fostering best practices and learning environments Provide teachers with differentiated professional learning opportunities to strengthen pedagogy Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound.  By June 2019, 100% of administrators and instructional staff will participate in learning communities where they will learn from one another and share best practices for instruction which will result in improved ratings on ADVANCE in components 3B, 3C, 3D, and 4E. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Principal  Assistant Principals  Professional Learning Committee which includes Staff Developer and ULIT Coach Professional Learning during Mondays 80-minute and Tuesdays 35-minute sessions All teachers and paras Professional Learning Committee Thursday 90-minute planning sessions within the school communi- Weekly beginning September 2018 to June 2019 Implementation of the following subgroups of the PLC to support growth of all educators ty ESL SIT Paraprofessional Mathematics Literacy Content Area – Social Studies and Science Early Childhood – PreK-1 Teachers invited to provide professional learning to their colleagues (Opportunities to Facilitate) Teachers meet with the focal PLC which includes administrators to plan workshops Professional Development in the area of differentiated instruction for ELLs, SWDs and academically at-risk students will be ongoing throughout the school year Classroom Teachers September 2018 to  Principal  Assistant Principals ESL June 2019  Professional Programs to support students’ individual needs will be analyzed for effectiveness: Afterschool Institute SETSS SBST Learning Committee  Brooklyn North 1  LEAP Imagine Learning Headsprout BrainPop NYSESLAT materials i-Ready reading and math Mathletics All members of the school community which includes outside consultants and the Brooklyn North supports will work together for the success of our students through learning growth, trust and respect via fairs, trips, assemblies, etc. Classroom Teachers September 2018 to Students June 2019  Parents – PTA, SLT, Learning Leaders and established Parents  Subgroups Students – Student Council, Community Service Team, and Grade Student Leaders  Teachers – Grade Inquiry Teams, Curriculum Focused Teams, Professional Learning Committees, Design Team, Social Club  Administrators – Design Team, Professional Learning Committees, Curriculum Focused Teams, Social Club and Superintendent monthly meetings Adminis- trators Outside Consul-tants Instructional Liaisons  Principal  Assistant Principals  Parent  Coordinator Staff Developer  Professional Learning Committee  Brooklyn North  District Family Advocate 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The results of each math assessment on various skills and reading level assessment using the Fountas & Pinnell/DIBELS reading inventory system will be sent to parents/guardians for review and their signature via progress reports Conduct Parent Workshops demonstrating the following implemented activities: a) Shared reading and math blocks b) ELA and Math standardized test formats and ways to assist children c) NYSESLAT test format and ways to assist children 2  d) Explanation of NYS report card and School Quality Report – at monthly SLT/PTA meetings e) Parent orientation and engagement meetings f) Development of Comprehensive Educational Plan with SLT During the September orientation meeting classroom teachers will discuss and explain yearly educational goals, curriculum, classroom procedures, support activities, etc.  Parent Workshops will also focus on differentiated instructional activities.  Parents will be encouraged to join the Learning Leaders Program  Technology supports will be provided throughout the school year  Parent Coordinator will provide supports for parents with the School Account site Supportive Personnel  Principal  Assistant Principals  Universal Literacy Coach  Parent Coordinator   Professional Learning Committee  Brooklyn North  District Family Advocate Staff Developers Timeline Sept. ’18 to June ‘19 Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Purchase of Technology (document camera, laptops, iPads) Purchase of educational materials to support teachers growth – Common Core Standards and Strategies Flipchart, Book, The Leader In Me, How Schools and Parents Around the World are Inspiring Greatness, One Child at a Time, Book, The Power of Two Purchase of Consultants – Singapore, LEAP, Language Power and Education Consortium Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 3  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 75% od teachers will increase their ADVANCE ratings in the following components by at least one level: Components 3B,3C, 3D and 4E. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure the will be used to assess progress:  Observations  Reflection Forms  Meeting Agendas  Surveys Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on Data from the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey the following indicators need to be a focus:  Analysis of results of NYCDOE Parent Survey  Analysis of Parent May Survey  Use a variety of methods to communicate student progress in all curriculum areas with parents/guardians regularly Increase involvement with Community Outreach Programs to support families Increase the percentage of yearly attendance from 91.8% to at least 94% by June 2019    Use of a variety of methods to communicate with parents/guardians on the importance of children attending school regularly School Strengths    Increased parent/guardian learning workshops in 2017-2018 from six in 2016-17 to at ten Increased family involvement in school academic activities Increased communicating student progress to families via Progress Reports and technology programs School Priority Increase the percentage of yearly attendance from 91.8% to at least 93% by June 2019   Work with families of chronically absent students and those in temporary housing  Increase attendance of Early Childhood students PK, K and 1 and parents/guardians at workshops Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school staff will continue implementing outreach protocols to establish a strong home-school connection as evidenced by an increase of at least 5% of parents/guardians participating in school activities and workshops focused on curriculum, attendance and support programs as measured by sign in sheets and the percentage of completed Learning Environment Surveys - Focus: Five Pillars of PreK, Common Core Learning Standards, Instructional Shifts in Literacy and Mathematics, and Literacy at Home 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Based on 2015-2016 NYC School Survey and School Quality Guide, there was a decrease in the percentage of parents completing the School Survey. Although feedback was positive, there is still a need to improve the communication of academic progress and next learning steps with students and their families so that clarity of expectations will lead to acceleration of student learning Parents/ Guardians of all P.S./I.S. 45K students Monthly throughout September 2018 to June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals  Progress Reports will be distributed to all parents at the PreK-8th Parent Coordinator end of the following months: October, December, January, & May  Progress Reports and Grade Newsletters will indicate the learning for the month in all curriculum areas  Progress Reports will highlight students overall attendance percentage current in the school year  Parents will have the opportunity to schedule time to meet with teachers during Tuesdays 40-minute Parent Engagement periods With the increase of English Language Learners, we will hold monthly meetings to support their acquisition of English.  ELL and technology classes will be implemented  ELL teachers in collaboration with the SETSS teachers will host PD providing families with support and strategies to help their child (ren) at home  The Education Consortium consultants will hold meetings with parents to overview ENL strategies to support language growth at home Paraprofessionals (for translation support) Brooklyn North Support Staff 6 Parents of English Language Learners  To support parents of English Language Learners and students with IEP’s, the following workshops will be organized by the parent coordinator:  Common Core State Standards workshop for parents to understand the nature of the standards, the implications for instruction, and strategies to be implemented at home to reinforce school learning  ELLs—POV (Parent Orientation Video)  Technology programs to support student learning in the home (BrainPop, Imagine Learning, i-Ready  Special Education workshops informing parents of their rights Monthly throughout September 2018 to June 2019 Parents/ Guardians of all P.S./I.S. 45K English Language Learners and students with IEP’s PreK-8th Principal Assistant Principals Parent Coordinator Paraprofessional (for translation support) ULIT Coach District Parent Liaison ESL providers SETSS providers IEP teacher Principal Assistant Principals Parent Coordinator Strategies to improve student attendance: Parents/  Host parent orientation in September – where teachers will discuss and explain the yearly educational goals, curriculum, class/school protocols and procedures  Host educational family events/activities throughout the Guardians of all P.S./I.S. 45K students PreK-8th school year  Encourage meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Team and Parent Teacher Association  Encourage more parents to become Learning Leaders  Provide written and verbal progress reports informing parents of student progress Monthly throughout September 2018 to June 2019 7  Monthly meetings with parents of chronically absent students  Monthly newsletter informing parents/guardians of school events, classroom instruction and pertinent information from DOE  Conduct monthly workshops for parents/guardians hosted by Parent Coordinator, Administration and/or Teachers  Provide homework help sessions bi-monthly  Purchase DATACATION, a program that notifies parents daily about lateness and absence  Recognize and reward students and parents for monthly  attendance growth/perfect Students with perfect monthly attendance are given ribbons at monthly assemblies. Student's names are posted on a monthly hallway display. Paraprofessionals (for translation support) PTA Executive Board District Parent Liaison 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Community Based Organizations supporting family and community engagement: Cool Culture 83rd Precinct LEAP Urban Advantage Elementary and Middle School Science Initiative Community 4 Mental Health Program Woodhull and Wyckoff Hospitals Wellness Council Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Purchase of educational materials to support parents growth Purchase of Food and Materials to support parent workshops and fairs Per Diem for Substitute Teachers to provide workshop learning to parents/guardians 8  Funds to support parents attending in and out of state conferences Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 3% increase in parent attendance at parent workshops and school activities. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure that will be used to assess progress Parent Attendance logs for parent workshops and school events. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Delivery of service is provided through the following methods: Intervention is provided during the following: Small Group One-to-One Tutoring School Day   Professional Prep Period  Wednesday and Thursday Institute Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) ● Students scoring at level 1 or 2 on the 2018 NY State ELA assessment ● ELL students scoring at the Beginning or Intermediate level in reading on the 2018 NYSELAT ● Early Childhood students (K-2nd) with an independent reading level two or more levels below their grade level Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) DIBELS Program to support the Response to Intervention (RTI) in literacy for the bottom four students of each class (K-5th). Progress monitoring provides opportunities to track identified students in order to make decisions about changes to intervention and/or instruction. i-READY Diagnostic and Instruction Reading/ELA Differentiated Instruction Online Learning Program This program assists students in developing comprehension skills. The program analyzes students baseline assessment and then creates individualized learning plans for 0  Mathematics ● Students scoring at level 1 or 2 on the 2018 NY State Math assessment Science ● Students in 5th grade who scored at level 1 or 2 on the 2018 NY State 4th Grade Science assessment Students. Students sign in at least 90-minutes per week in school and 60- minutes at home during the week. i-READY Diagnostic and Instruction Math Differentiated Instruction Online Learning Program This program assists students in developing comprehension skills. The program analyzes students baseline assessment and then creates individualized learning plans for Students. Students sign in at least 90-minutes per week in school and at least 60-minutes at home during the week. The Academic Intervention programs in the area of Science are as follows: Delivery of service is provided through the following methods: Intervention is provided during the following: Small Group One-to-One Tutoring School Day   Professional Prep Period  Wednesday and Thursday Institute Intervention is provided during the following: School Day   Professional Prep Period Intervention is provided during the school day in small group ● Students in Harcourt sessions twice a week for students 4th and 8th grade who are scoring below grade level on unit assessments This program focuses on the review of concepts previously Taught. The development of science content and hands-on activities assist in fostering of grades K-1, 2and 5; three days a week for students of grades 3and 4. Middle School students are provided additional 1  Social Studies understanding for students of grades 3rd , 4th and 5th. The Academic Intervention science support daily with the science teacher. Intervention is provided during programs in the area of Social Studies are as follows: Houghton Mifflin the school day in small group sessions twice a week for students of grades K-5. Students of grades 3rd-8th who performed at the lowest level in standards that focused on informational text on the 2018 NY State ELA assessment Harcourt Intervention is provided during the following:  School Day  Professional Prep Period All At-Risks Services are provided:  During the school day This program focuses on the review of concepts previously taught. The development of history and social studies content include: map skills, reading of tables and charts, as well as understanding government. Resources from Passport The At-Risk services provided by the Guidance Counselor Middle School students are provided additional social studies support daily with the social studies teacher. All At-Risks Services are provided through: At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) ● Students who have lost family members, friends or have been involved in traumatic experiences i.e. fire, car accident, etc. ● Students who are exhibiting depression ● Students with extreme behavioral concerns are as follows: Grief Counseling Individual sessions counsels with students who have lost family members and/or have been involved with traumatic experiences Peer Counseling Group sessions Classroom 2  presentations counsels with students who are having interpersonal problems Articulation with Outside Agencies The At-Risk services provided by the School Psychologist and Social Worker are as follows: Grief Counseling counsels with students who have lost family members and/or have been involved with traumatic experiences Peer Counseling counsels with students who are having interpersonal problems Articulation with Outside Agencies The At-Risk services provided by the DOH School Nurse are as follows: Open Airways – Trains asthmatic students in how to take care of themselves when an 3  attack is coming on, also provides them with understanding food choices that may trigger an attack H1N1 – Provides training to students on the correct way to wash hands and cover mouth when sneezing or coughing, provides staff with current information from DOE on the flu EBOLA – Provides staff and families with updates on cases around the community. 4  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) At this time there are seventy-six (76) students living in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. To support our students in temporary housing based on the McKinney-Vento Act, the following is put in placed:  Transportation needs are identified and put in place (metro cards or GE bus) by the Pupil Personnel Secretary  Uniforms are purchased for students when needed by the Parent Coordinator  Additional academic supports are sent home with students, i.e. reading and mathematics workbooks, literature for personal reading, notebooks, pencils, crayons, rulers, calculators, etc.  Healthy care packs are sent home. The care packs include toothbrushes, deodorant, soap, wipes, and other toiletries.  Additional academic intervention programs are put in place to foster academic growth throughout the school year. Incentives are provided for attendance growth   Articulation between academic supports at the shelter and the school's Parent Coordinator and Attendance Teacher are ongoing throughout the school year Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 5  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 6  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. All recruited teachers will be appropriately certified and highly qualified, with some limited flexibility, consistent with State regulations. Principal will work closely with Brooklyn North’s Human Resources support and will follow the policies set forth by the Department of Education to ensure that the selection of highly qualified teachers follow the guidelines set by the NYS Education Department. The Principal in collaboration with the Brooklyn North’s Human Resources support will work to identify qualified teachers through major recruitment campaigns, hiring halls and through relationships with Colleges and Universities. In order to ensure that the school reaches 100% of high quality teachers, professional development will be ongoing to provide teachers with instructional practices that support the grade/program teaching. Teachers who are not highly qualified will be given the opportunity to take courses to become qualified in their assignment for 2017-2018 school year. SWP Title I funds will be set aside to assist such teachers to become highly qualified (ex. Reimbursement for tuition cost, workshop attendance, etc.). In addition, on-going professional development opportunities will be offered to all members of the instructional community, specifically our newest teachers. Weekly grade conferences, Academic Intervention Service meetings, etc. are conducted covering a variety of topics, including but not limited to: differentiated instruction, unit planning, formal and informal observation guide lines, all curriculum related activities, student support instructional activities, etc. An in-house Mentor Program and Buddy Peer System are also incorporated to support teachers. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional learning will target the assessed pedagogical needs of the staff with differentiated high quality professional learning opportunities on and off school site. Professional learning will take place on days as prescribed by the UFT contract guidelines and Chancellor’s 7  designated Conference Days. Professional learning will be on-going on Mondays for 80-minute sessions and through District Superintendent and DOE opportunities. New Teachers will be supported by a mentor, buddy teacher and staff developer. Mentors will meet with their assigned new teacher at least two times a week. The staff developer will be assigned to arrange meetings with new teachers at least three to four times a month. New teachers will be supported in the following areas:  Developing classroom protocols and routines  Classroom management  Teacher Evaluation System  Preparation for observations - ADVANCE   Effective communication with parents   Complying with clerical responsibilities Formal and informal assessment strategies Lesson planning Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) 8  Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). ● There is a member from all grades (PK-8) on the Professional Learning Committee (PLC). Members meet to support each other as they overview created curriculum maps in ELA, math, science and social studies that are Common Core Learning Standard (CCLS) aligned. ● The Data Specialist, Staff Developer and Administrators work with grade teams to assist with curriculum mapping to ensure that curriculum is aligned with the CCLS, utilizes higher order thinking questioning, and differentiates for student subgroups. ● The PLC members from grades PK-2 work together with the Universal Literacy Reading Coach to overview completed curriculum units, collected student work samples, analyze data and assist in making adjustments to curriculum units as indicated where needed. ● Early childhood workshops and fairs are scheduled for parents of students in grades PK-2. Neighboring Day Care Centers are invited to attend. These fairs focus on early literacy and mathematics programs. The fairs also introduce parents to the technology based programs that their students are working with during the school day. Both parents and students engage in Common Core aligned activities. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. School provides ongoing professional learning to all teachers in analyzing assessment data to increase teachers understanding of student performance and strengthen teacher practice. School provides ongoing differentiated professional development regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. School community selected and agreed upon the selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures to be implemented.  Common planning time is scheduled which enables teachers to gather and analyze student assessment data- weekly  Professional learning training is provided in data analysis  Grade teams analyze student data to set interim goals for the grade and all student subgroups- Weekly  Classroom teachers analyze individual student data to set interim goals.  Grade leaders work with teachers to develop instructional strategies and activities to address the needs of     students in the lowest – middle – top third of the grade.- weekly Funds are set aside to provide substitute coverage and per session for professional learning/planning for teachers and other support staff. School administrators use formal and informal observations to monitor the implementation of Grade Team recommendations and strategies in focus classrooms and provide timely written feedback to teachers.- Ongoing School administrators meet with grade teams during data conferences to analyze and monitor academic progress of identified students and provide written feedback detailing next steps in instruction for these students.- Monthly School administrators and support staff attend and facilitate training in data analysis and best practices in literacy and math, as well as best practices in instruction for English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities. - Ongoing 9   Funds allocated to purchase instructional materials to address the needs of student subgroups in grades 3-8 – native language leveled libraries – gender specific texts – leveled libraries  Administrators monitor implementation of intervention/enrichment strategies and activities for student sub- groups through formal and informal observations. - using Danielson’s rubric for Teacher effectiveness as a coaching tool to improve instruction and provide timely written feedback.- Ongoing 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Referenced in sections 5, 6, 7 and 8 Referenced in sections 5, 6 and 8 Referenced in sections 5, 6 and 8 Referenced in sections 5, 6 and 8 Referenced in sections 5, 6 and 8 Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Federal Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local $472,472 $86,289 $13,774 0 $3,763,664 X X X X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual 0  identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 1  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Horace E. Greene-P.S./I.S. 45K , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Horace E. Greene-P.S./I.S. 45K will support parents and families of Title I students by : providing materials and support in helping parents work with their children to improve academic achievement, e.g., literacy, math and computerized training providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children 2  fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: * actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact * engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills * ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact * support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills * maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office. * conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home (Monthly) * provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report * host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 3  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (November 2018) * schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions * translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed * conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event (December 2018) where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference (October 2018) hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year (December 2018, March 2019 and June 2019) encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee supporting or hosting Family Day events (May and June 2019) establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers (Learning Leaders) providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress (October, December, January, and May) developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress (Principal’s Monthly Newsletter, Class Newsletter) providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand School-Parent Compact (SPC) Horace E. Greene-P.S./I.S. 45K, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 4  The Title I teacher understands the importance of a good school environment where every student will learn. The teacher’s role is important in providing a quality educational experience for all students. The following responsibilities are to be carried out by all teachers of the school community: 1. To insure the partnership between school and home, keep an open line of communication with parents/guardians and other teachers on the academic progress of all students 2. To teach the state and city common core curriculum to all students 3. To individualize instruction to meet the needs of each child 4. To keep parents/guardians informed of all parent meetings and workshops In order to improve parent/guardian participation, we will distribute the parent-friendly version of the Department of Education’s document “What Your Child Should Know” at the September’s “Meet Your Child’s Teacher” evening. Parents/Guardians will be informed on information regarding the testing process, formal and informal assessments that will be administered throughout the school year. Parents/Guardians will also receive an overview of the curriculum and expectations. Follow-up meetings will be held throughout the school year to provide parents with pertinent information related to their child (ren)’s educational growth. To increase parent involvement and participation in the home-school collaboration, we propose the following: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships  Parent Coordinator will provide monthly meetings and workshops to be held during the school day and on Saturdays in conjunction with curriculum specialists  Development of support groups for parents whose child(ren) are in danger of retention (Potential Holdover)  Ongoing articulation of support of nearby shelters  Computerized training program to enable parents to retrieve their child (ren)’s academic assessment scores and attendance reports at home (Schoolnet, Skedula, Pupil Path, etc.)  To encourage parents to join the Learning Leaders program  To provide parents/guardians with feedback in their home language  To provide parents with monthly progress reports on their child(ren) To provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  ensuring the Parent Coordinator is accessible to parents daily  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff  member arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences, Parent Engagement Tuesdays, Science Night, Parent Learning Workshops To provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents  creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians 5    assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend) sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities We, as parents, will support our child (ren)’s learning in the following ways: Supporting my child’s learning by making education a priority in our home by: making sure my child is on time and prepared every day for school monitoring attendance talking with my child about his/her school activities everyday scheduling daily homework time providing an environment conducive for study making sure that homework is completed monitoring the amount of television my child(ren) watch  Participating, as appropriate, in decisions relating to my children’s education  Promoting positive use of my child’s extracurricular time  Participating in school activities on a regular basis  Staying informed about my child’s education and communicating with the school by promptly reading all notices from the school or the school district received by my child or by mail and responding, as appropriate  Reading together with my child every day  Providing my child with a library card  Respecting the cultural differences of others  Helping my child accept consequences for negative behavior  Being aware of and following the rules and regulations of the school   Expressing high and offering praise and encouragement Supporting the School and Chancellor’s discipline policies III. Student Responsibilities We, as students of Horace E. Greene’s Middle School, will share the responsibility to improve our academic achievement and achieve the State’s high learning standards. 6  Specifically, we will: Come to school ready to do our best and be the best Come to school with all the necessary tools for learning; i.e., pens, pencils, books, etc. Listen and follow directions Participate in class discussions and activities Model positive citizenship Follow the class’ rules of conduct Follow the school’s dress code Ask for help when we don’t understand Do our homework every day and ask for help when we need to Study for tests and complete assignments Read independently for a minimum of 40 minutes every day outside of school time Get adequate rest every night Use the library, as well as other resources, to get information and to find books that we enjoy reading Give to our parents/guardians, all notices and information we receive at school Provide community service throughout the school community weekly 7  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 114 8  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Currently 103 of the school's 625 students (16% of the student body) have been identified as English Language Learners (ELL's). Our goal is to improve teaching and learning in core subject areas for ELLs and to implement a strong student support to help them meet the EDAT 1 and 2 status for the school year 2018-2019 and to help them perform at city and state level. Our NYSESLAT EDAT data shows that our ELL population in grades 3 through 8 needs to work on reading and writing skills. They need to work on their critical thinking and academic language skills, along with test taking strategies. Therefore, teachers are focusing on academic vocabulary development, reading comprehension and writing skills during classroom instruction. We have 10 SIFE students, who are largely struggling readers, so extra support is given to them. PS/IS has planned an ELL Academy for ELLs instruction to support those students' needs. The primary goal of this program is to amplify the literacy, mathematical, and cognitive/academic skills of all ELLs by incorporating recognized and research based ESL instructional strategies across core content subject areas so they can perform at city and state grade levels. ESL strategies include but are not limited to: scaffolding, TPR, song and chants, graphic organizers, (i.e. tables, story maps), modeling and retelling, sequencing, reciprocal teaching and accountable talk. ELL students will work with challenging and authentic activities in Math, Science, Social Studies, Technology, and ELA that meet their unique learning styles and participate in special events that recognize the diversity of their cultural backgrounds. The program will start in January 2019 and go through March 2019. The subgroups are : Newcomers=44 students , 3rd grade-13 students, 4th grade-6 students, 5th grade-10 students, 6th grade-9 students, 7th grade-3 students, 8th grade-3 students. Developing Ells=32students, 4th grade-7 students, 5th grade-12 students, 6th grade-8 students, 7th grade-4 students, 8th grade-2 students. Long Term Ells=5 students, 6th grade-1 student, 8th grade-4 students. ELL SWD=7 students, 4th grade-1 student, 5th grade-2 students, 6th grade-4 student, 8th grade=3 students SIFE Students=11 students, 4th grade-2 students, 5th grade-5 students, 6th grade-3 students, 7th grade-1 student. Former ELLs=12 students, 3rd grade-2 students, 4th grade- 1 student, 6th grade-4 students, 7th grade-1 student, 8th grade-4 students. The ELL Academy will start in January 2019-April 2019 on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:30 to 4:00 pm, an average of 3 hours a week. There will be 18 instructional sessions. Two certified ESL teachers will provide ENL instruction to 4 groups and each ENL teacher will rotate between four groups. In addition there will be 4 classroom teachers that will provide instruction in in speaking, listening and writing. One teacher will be assigned to each of the following grade bands (1-2, 3-4, 5-6, 7-8). This way all students will receive support from the ENL teacher and 9  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information reinforcement from their classroom teacher. Teachers will conduct the classes from 2:30 to 4:00 pm. The ELL Academy will take place on Wednesday and Thursday 2:30-4:00 (1 hour and 30 minutes) 4 groups (Grades 1-2, 3-4, 5-6, 7-8) serviced by 2 ENL teachers. Total of 6 teachers for the after-school program. Group 1- 1st and 2nd Grade, Group 2: 3rd and 4th Grade, Group 3: 5th and 6th Grade, Group 4: 7th and 8th grade. Each teacher will be responsible for designing lessons that integrate Science and/or Math or ELA and/or Social Studies in English. Each group will be divided into a group of up to 29 students per teacher based on proficiency levels as determined by the NYSESLAT or NYSITELL. Flexible grouping will be used to group students together to deliver instruction. This can be as a whole class, a small group, or with a partner, this is a great way for students to work together in a variety of ways and configurations, depending upon activity and learning outcomes. Entering and Emerging students will receive more intense, skill-driven activities, whereas the Transitioning and Expanding students will receive more enrichment. One subject will be focused on each day, Reading Day 1 and Math Day 2. One supervisor from 2:30-4:00 (regular working hours 8:10-2:30) will be assigned to monitor teachers' instruction, support teacher development, and help with identifying teaching strategies. The teachers assigned to instructed the The ELL Academy poses a Bilingual or ESL certification , as well as many years of experience working with ELLs. Teachers will differentiate instruction to meet the needs of ELLs using various resources including Imagine Learning, Max Scholar, i-Ready, Attanasio (NYSESLAT), Scholastic, book bins, dual Language library with leveled books for classrooms both in English and Spanish. They will track student progress with the DIBELS and Running Records (administered 4 times throughout the school year), teacher generated assessments, and teacher conference notes. Parents will be notified of the opportunity of being a part of the ELL Academy in their home language. Teachers will take daily attendance during the after school program to keep track of students participation. Parents will be notified of their child’s progress for the duration of the program. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Professional development for teachers of ELLs focuses on teacher planning of academic and linguistic objectives in all content areas. There will be ongoing articulation to teachers to provide continuous support to ELL students in achieving English language proficiency so they can attain the same standards established for all students across the grades. This communication plan helps to inform instruction for each grade level aligned with the core curriculum. Topics will be address that will inform teachers to explore the Literacy strategies, SIOP, best scaffolding practices, RtI, oral language development and integrating technology into all content areas to enhance language instruction. The workshops will be led by in-house staff who have years of experience successfully teaching ESL and literacy. In addition, the Network and other outside resources will provide workshops and individual assistance to all the staff working with ELLs on the methodology and strategies of teaching ESL. The Multilingual Learner (ML) Institute three-day workshop did come to a cost towards the Title III funding. Five teachers attended the three-day workshop during regular work hours (8:10-2:30). The ML Institute kept track of the teachers daily attendance, a copy was placed in the ENL binder. All agenda and attendance sheets will be 0  Part C: Professional Development kept in a binder, in the ENL room (270). The records will be properly labeled so that records can be easily located when needed. Number of Teachers receiving training:All Brooklyn North Workshops will be attended by two ENL teachers. All PS/IS 45 Workshops will be attended by all staff members (teachers K-8) October 11, 2018 ELL Coordinators working Groups Session 1 October 18, 2018 Nuts and Bolts of Creating ELL Programs: Critical ELL Components of Compliance October 29, 2018 Reading with Power and Passion: Planning Strategic Conferences and Small Group Strategy Lessons during Independent Reading Grades 6-12 November 6, 2018 Dr.Cloud strategies for Long Term ELL's (session 1) November 14, 2018 ENL Working Workshop (session 2) November 21, 2018 Elementary School Coalition High Quality Instruction for ELLs( Session 2) December 3, 2018 Reading with Power and Passion: Planning Small Group Strategy Lessons during Independent Reading December 17th, 2018 Dr.Cloud strategies for Long Term ELL's (session 2) December 18 2018 Elementary School Coalition High Quality Instruction for ELLs( Session 3) January 08, 2019 Session I: Engaging English Language Learners:The most current trends to engage English Language Learners. (PS/IS45) January 17, 2019 Nuts and bolts of Creating ELL programs:Critical ELL Components of Compliance January 19, 2019 Title I Common Core Math and Reading Fair (PS/IS 45) January 25, 2019 Elementary School Coalition High Quality Instruction for ELLs( Session 4) January 29, 2019 Session 2: Engaging English Language Learners: The Most Current Trends to Engage English Language (PS/IS/45) February 05, 2019 How can we address student misconceptions to engage all learners within our classrooms? (PS/IS 45) February 12, 2019 Utilizing Learning Progressions to Bridge Conceptual Thinking Gaps (PS/IS 45) March 05, 2019 Title 1 Math and Reading Common Core Workshops (PS/IS 45) March 12, 2019 Utilizing Learning Progressions to Bridge Gaps and Advance Learning Session II (PS/IS45) March 19, 2019 Overview of ELA, Math, and NYSESLAT state assessment (PS/IS 45 June 6, 2019 Nuts and Bolts of Creating ELL Programs: Critcal ELL Components of Compliance Workshops with Brooklyn North will continue through the '19-'20 - dates will be forthcoming 1  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: PS/IS 45 K provides parents/guardians with workshops that are designed to inform them about their children's academic, social growth, and how to enable them to assist their children in their academic and social growth. The administrators, teachers, the social workers, invited speakers and the Parent Coordinator provide the presentations. The workshops are conducted in English and Spanish. The presenters of these workshops will be conducted by out ESL certified teachers, with the support of the Content area certified teachers. The presentations include such themes as : Common Core, Preparation for State Tests (Math, Reading, and Science), Speech, Asthma, HIV, Nutrition, and Question Preparation for Open School Night Workshop. All seven workshops given to parents for 2 hour sessions. During these celebrations, activities, and workshops. Parents will be notified of these activities by school letter, flyers and parent brochures in the parents' language of choice as indicated on the Home Language Identification Survey. The ENL teachers must retain a file of all ELL parent outreach/meeting-related documents and records such as Parent's Communication Log. This is done to foster closer relationships with all parents including parents of ELLs. All agendas, attendance sheets, and invitations in parents preferred languages will be in a binder in the ENL classroom. All parental engagement activities are at no cost to the Title III. The school parent coordinator, Mrs. Bell and PTA regularly meet and discuss parents’ concern within the school community and plan activities that involve parents' active participation. Since parental involvement enhances student’s performance, the school ensures that ELL parents participate in all school activities. These activities include Meet the Teacher Night, Family Fairs, Dad Bring Your Child to School Day, Father-Daughter Dance, Mother-Son Dance. All records, including agendas, attendance sheets, invitations to parents in their preferred languages will be kept in the ENL binder. The records will be properly labeled so that records can be easily located when needed. Schedule of 2018-2019 Parent/Guardian Events September 20, 2018 Meet The Teacher Night, 4:30 to 7:30 p.m. September 25, 2018 Dad Take Your Child to School Day September 26, 2018 Kg to 2nd Grade Picture Day September 27, 2018 3rd to 5th Grade Picture Day September 28, 2018 Pre-K Picture October 13, 2018 PTA Meeting, 9:30 a.m. November 3, 2018 PTA Meeting. 9:30 a.m. Title 1 Early Childhood Math & Reading Workshop Movie Day for Students December 8, 2018 PTA Meeting. 9:30 a.m. December 13, 2018 Mother and Son Winter Wonderland Dance January 05, 2019 PTA Meeting. 9:30 a.m. January 19, 2019 Title I Common Core Math and Reading Fair 2 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities March 02, 2019 PTA Meeting. 9:30 a.m. Title 1 Math and Reading Common Core April 06, 2019 PTA Meeting. 9:30 a.m. . April 20, 2019 Mother and Daughter Brunch May 04, 2019 PTA Meeting. 9:30 a.m. Nomination & Election for 2018-2019 PTA Executive Board May 18, 2019 Father and Daughter Spring Dance June 8, 2019 Father and Son Sports Day (Wear Your Favorite Jersey) June 8, 2019 PTA Meeting. 9:30 a.m. June 22, 2019 Family Day Festival Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) NA  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL NA NA NA NA NA NA Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 3  4  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 32 School Name Horace E. Greene School -- P.S./I.S. 45K Borough Brooklyn School Number 045 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Tracey Lott-Davis Coach Mary Ellen Waters ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Janet EnriquezSandra Cordero Teacher/Subject Area R. Walter, 4th Gr. Teacher/Subject Area R. Flores, 3rd Gr. Related-Service Provider I. Davis (Speech) Superintendent Sheila Gorski Assistant Principal Carleen Miller-Bailey Coach Emily Chang School Counselor Robert Benetos Parent Angelis Roberts Parent Coordinator Debra Shabazz Field Support Center Staff Member Daniel Purus Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 1 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 724 5 Total number of ELLs 117 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 16.16%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The classroom teachers use mClass Reading 3D, iReady, and Fountas and Pinnell running records to assess the early literacy of the students including ELLs.They assess the students on an on-going basis, the results show the ELLs different reading levels. We also incorporate the ELA and Math MOSL at the beinginning and end of the year. Based on these assessments the data indicates a need for intense reading instruction for the ELLs. The ENL teacher collaborate with the classroom teachers for consistency of instruction and to ensure that these students will meet the learning standards and read on grade level by using all formative assessments data to inform them of which modalities students need reinforcement. The results of the data collected from the formative and curriculum assessments will guide teachers to deliver reading instruction with emphasis on alphabet recognition and phonics using the Max Scholar set of materials that include online access to Max phonics, Max words, and Max Reading. This enables the ELLs to reinforce the language that is taught during the day. ELL Periodic Assessment is also used to monitor their progress throughout the year. However, during the year, the ENL teacher uses authentic assessment such as Daily Observations, checklists, rubrics, exit slips, and Performance Assessments. 6  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? In order to support this effort the school provides the opportunity for teachers to have grade level meetings on a daily basis. As well as professional development on a vary of topics to support ELL instruction. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? As a school we use the Periodic assessment to inform teachers of how students are doing in each modality: listening, speaking, reading, and writing. The data informs teachers which areas need to be targeted. Students are given the periodic assessment twice a year fall and spring to keep us informed of progress being made. Based on the data that Periodic assessment provided, the area of need is Reading and Writing. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Some of the structures that the school has in place to address interventions once data has been gathered are goal setting, observations, question strategies, and self - peer assessment. For example, goal setting will help students set goals for themselves by using student work and exemplars of what is expected of them and will help students see and understand where they are, where they need to be, and an effective process for getting there. Also, question strategies, will help teachers ask better questions which will allow an opportunity for deeper thinking and provides teachers with significant insight into the degree and depth of understanding of each student. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] All ELL students will be administered with the Periodic assessment to inform teachers of which modality they students need extra support and reinforcement, as well as usin mCLass Reading 3D Assessment System four times a year to identify students in need of further assessment and possible movement to Tier2 or 3 intervention. This assessment system will provide feedback about class performance to help school leadership identify when a teacher might require support, it will identify students with insufficient progress between screening to progress monitor for six weeks to ensure growth. We also utilize DIBELS to progress monitoring in tiers 2 and 3 at least monthly and up to every other week, this provides parents with written notification regarding the rational intervention and information on students identified for Tier 2 and 3 with intensive levels of target instruction to meet need and increase progress towards meeting the standard. We use RTI data in determining if a student has a learning disability to be able to provide pre-referral documentation. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We use the EDAT for information on students scores for NYSESLAT and NYSITELL, these assessments inform us of how students scored on each modality, and whether improved or regressed. This allows teachers to see students progress and areas of need. This will also allow us to group students according to their proficiency level. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? This year's NYSITELL showed that most Kindergarten students are at the Transitioning level. The students from grades 5-7 are all Entering students. Therefore, instruction should focused on language development and vocabulary for upper grades. Kindergarten and first grade lessons should focus on alphabet recognition, sight words and phonics. We currently have ICT classes in every grade, this education service in which one general education teacher and one special education teacher work together in the same classroom will also help to support and teach our ELL students. We also provide students with enrichment classes in Spanish, music, and art. In Spring, all the ELLs will take the New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT) to measure their progress. The NYSESLAT results indicate that the proficiency level of most students move up in all modalities of listening, speaking, reading and writing during the first two years. The ENL teacher's focus is on teaching phonics, guided reading, the use of Bloom's Taxonomy's art of questionning to develop thinking skills and Higher order Thinking Questions. As well as the 7  use of Echoing, choral reading, Read-alouds, books on tapes , and sentence frames are used as listening and speaking activities. These assessment results overall, determine what skill each child needs to grow that drives the teacher's instructional decision. The success of the school's program for ELLs are measured in the achievement of the targeted goals in terms of the parents' active response and participation in school, improved basic skills and English language proficiency of ELLs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Depending on the number of students in a grade and their availability by the scheduling of classes for services: the models push-in and pull out are used. Our ENL teacher will push-in when there is a need for content area support for ELLs. Beginners and Intermediate ENL students are grouped with Non-ENL students within the same classroom. The former ELLs + Advanced ELLs are placed in different classes on each grade to create more diverse classrooms. As for the Pull-out method the ELLs are picked-up from the classroom and provided differentiated ENL instruction according to grade and English proficiency level. Transitioning and Expanding ELLs are also grouped by grade and English proficiency level. The grouping is based on grade and proficiency level, i.e. students in Kindergarten and grade one [Entering and Emerging] together, grades 2/3 (E/EM); grades 3/4 (E/EM), grade 5/6 (E/EM); and grades 7/8 (E/EM). b. TBE program. If applicable. Not applicable c. DL program. If applicable. Not Applicable 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Based on NYSESLAT results, students receive the mandated periods for Beginner, Intermediate and Advanced. This results in hiring of the appropriate number of ESL teachers to fulfill requirements of instruction and to ensure the right amount of services are being provided to each student on a weekly basis. All beginner 3rd, 4th, and 5th grade students are pulled-out for their mandated ESL instructional minutes. The 1st and 2nd grade beginners are also grouped and pulled out for the mandated instructional time. In addition, the ESL teacher will push-in for all students from grades K-5. Scheduling is very crucial. It has to be done in collaboration with other ELL service providers.The ENL teacher collaborates with thes service providers such as Speech teacher, OT/PT, guidance & counseling provider, and SETSS to make sure that schedule is arranged to avoid conflict with ENL. This is done to ensure that mandated number of minutes are provided. Entering and Emerging ELLs are provided 2 units of of study per week (360 minutes) of ENL instruction and 1 unit of study per week (180 minutes) for Transitioning and Expanding ELLs. Those ELLs who exited out of NYSESLAT are still included in the schedule of services provided as they will continue to be provided with 90 minutes/week of instruction for two years even if they achieve commanding level of proficiency. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 8  Articulation is expected between the classroom teacher and the Freestanding ENL program teachers. Since research shows that the classroom environment provides limited opportunities for ELLs to produce oral language, one of the primary missions of our Freestanding ENL program is for our students to be given ample opportunities to produce oral language through activities and group work using the integrated and stand-alone ENL. The school’s ENL program is designed to develop both the social and academic development of ELLs. Basic interpersonal communication skills of ELLs in English are developed through cooperative learning approach in pair or in small group. During push-in, the ENL teacher sits and work with the group of ELLs to reinforce the lesson using ENL methodologies. Since the school uses Reading Street across the grades, the ENL teacher works in collaboration with the classroom teachers of ELLs through conversations and meetings to assist the students in reading, writing and language development. The ENL teacher provides conference notes to classroom teachers to reinforce and align language, literacy and Math instruction that fosters academic language development and to help students meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL teacher delivers 100% English in providing differentiated instruction using TPR, hands-on activities and Language Experience Approach- i.e exposing them to speaking and listening activities during the read-alouds, think alouds, phonics, and language patterns. The ENL teacher uses sheltered instruction- i.e. using English language instruction in teaching the content area topics more comprehensible to students with limited vocabularies. This includes using visuals, demonstrations and collaborative learning activities for the ELLs. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Our ELLs are tested using the LAB-R at the beginning of the school year to identify eligibilty. Students who are eligible and dominant in Spanish are then given the Spanish LAB to eveluate their native languge comprehension levels of proficiency in the native language. Additionally, our students are given the option to take the content area tests in math and science, in their native language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE), are provided with a very supportive environment that responds to their immediate social, cultural and linguistic needs. They are immersed in the English language. To work towards a goal the goal of biculturalism, a buddy system is utilized to assist ENL and SIFE students with the adjustment of a new school and new culture, adjusting to their classrooms' rituals, routines and educational activities. Our students are provided academic intervention services after school and on Saturdays through enrichment classes to accelerate academic achievement. ELLs who have less than three (3) years in the U.S. schools, continue to receive 360 minutes of ESL services for beginning and intermediate levels, and 180 minutes for advanced level students. The aforementioned will continue to receive services, until they are proficient on the NYSESLAT. Students who have been in the U.S. schools less than three (3) years, will be provided with lessons that offer, pictures, diagrams, and demonstrations. The ESL teacher provides differentiated instruction using Total Physical Response (TPR) methodologies, hands on activities and Language Experience Approach methodologies (i.e. playing and discussing books on tape, interactive learning on computers using Headsprout and Starfall. In addition, teacher will expose them to speaking and listening during the read-alouds. Phonics and language pattern teaching will also be employed with our ELLs. English Language Learners, with 4 to 6 years, will be offered intensive academic intervention so as to ensure intensified literacy and language development. They will receive explicit instruction in the five components of reading; phonemic awareness, phonics, fluency, vocabulary and comprehension instruction will be provided. The ENL teacher informs the administration about the former ELLs and makes sure that these ELLs who tested out of NYSESLAT will continue receiving additional academic support outside the classroom for 90 min per week (e.g. small group instruction other than ENL) while they continue to transition themselves into the regular mainstream class. Formers ELLs who are in the testing grades will continue to have testing accommodations, i.e. separate location and extended time and a half for two years after they test out, according to the CR Part 154-2. 9  6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers provide support to all ELL students with-in the classroom. As well as supportive material, i-Ready and Imagine Learnging, Reading Street, Max Scholar and Head Sprout. All programs idenitfy their current academic level, and provide ELL's with the support they need in vocabulary, grammer, communcication skills etc. All instruction is aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards for writing, reading, informational text, reading literature and language. The ENL teacher utilizes scaffolding strategies that unpack the academic language found in informational reading and content area learning. To enhance ELL's Math skills, the ENL teacher brings the academic language that they encounter during their daily math and reading lessons. ELLs –SWDs are provided focused instruction in phonics and small group guided reading and writing through all of these programs. School provides academic intervention services (SETSS) to these students. Teachers provide more language drills in oral and written forms, listening activities and test preps. The school uses the Reading Street curriculum for ELA- literacy and Ready Engage NY for Math. Both of these are Common Core aligned programs that will help all the students access academic contents and accelerate academic language development. In addition, the ENL teacher collaborates with the classroom teacher of these ELL-SWDs in planning a CCLS based- instruction that addresses language development. All lessons ar algined to the CCSS, the ENL teacher scaffolds the tasks across content area for ELLs. Teachers model during instructional conversations that involve higher order questionning. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ENL teachers are flexable when it comes to being able to push-in the classroom to support the student with the information given at hand. As well, as having the opportunity of being able to pull the student out of the classroom to give more one-to-one or small group support. Schedules for grade meetings to design lessons that address the needs of ELLs –SWDs. They are provided focused instruction in phonics and small group guided reading and writing. Aside from the services stipulated in theIEP, the school IEP teacher provides SETSS to these students. The IEP teacher performs small group instruction with designated ELL-SWDs and the lowest one-third of the school population while the classroom teacher provides instruction with the regular class. In addition to the 360 or 180 mandated number of minutes provided by the ENL teacher, the SETSS provider provides 60 minutes of academic instruction twice a week. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. There is no targeted intervention program for ELL subgroup alone but there is a targeted intervention program for at-risk students, i.e. students including ELLs who are at the bottom 1/3 and those scored level 1's and 2's. This is for both ELA and Math. All students, attend the After-School Program. This program offers both academic and social support to students from 2-8, two times a week from 2:30 to 4:00, Wednesday and Thursday. Professional Development is given to all teachers who are providing intervention to children with limited English proficiency and at-risk students. ELLs who have speech difficulty are serviced by the Speech Teacher, and we are planning on attending further workshops that will help us develop an intervention program. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We will provide our ELL students with Native Language/English dictionaries on a daily basis. In addition, ongoing, in-house, professional development, to infuse English Language instruction with classroom strategies to aid ELL students in learning English at an accelerated rate. Every teacher should attend professional development on language acquisition theory and vocabulary development and oral language development opportunities within each unit/lesson. Strategies on ELL language development will become part of all teacher team meetings in content areas and on all grade levels. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? There are no programs or services which are provided at 32K045 that will be discontinued. All programs offered are necessary to aid our ELLs in academic achievement 0  11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Both curricular and extracurricular activities are always schoolwide. Therefore, ELLs are afforded the same access and privilege to programs, i.e. small group instruction and SETSS, that other students receive. The After School Program is for all students except Pre-K-- 1. It starts from 2:30 to 4:00 p.m, Wednesdays and Thursdays (January thru April). If parents signed up for that after school program, students would benefit from both the academic and social services provided by the school staff. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. All ELLs in our school are part of the general education classroom, with the exception of our self contained Special Education classrooms with ELLs. As a result, all ELL students are afforded the same access to all materials and technology as any other student in our school, including our ELL students who are in Special Education classes. Every classroom in our school has technology, including SMART boards and computers. In addition, all classes are scheduled for additional time in the computer lab with their teachers where they engage in work on computer programs designated for their grade and ability levels, such as, iReady, Max Scholar, Imagine Learning, Head Sprout, and Brain Pop etc. In order to maximize student support, our techers supply ELLs with materials such as bilingual dictionaries and glossaries, audio books, phonics workbooks that support instruction. Reading Street by Scott Forseman is used to support English Language development. Our ESL program utilizes, books on tapes, posters, workbooks and picture cards depending on student proficiency levels. There are language-rich materials with picture supports to make the content and language comprehensible for beginners. We use Headsprout, an internet-based reading program that effectively teaches the essential skills and strategies required for rapid reading success. For the intermediate and advanced we use the iReady program, which targets specific reading skills. In addition, to prepare ELLs for content-area State tests in math and ELA, the school provides workbooks, such as buckle down to specifically address skill-based needs.These materials are used to plan and design rigorous lessons aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards to meet the students' needs and expectations. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Our ELLs are encouraged to use their native language with their teachers and their peers in both academic and social settings so they are able to affirm their own cultures and fully express themselves as they transition and develop their second language. Dual language libraries are provided as a means of fostering a more meaningful transition. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The ESL grouping in our school is according to their grade and proficiency levels. Therefore, the services they receive are age and grade appropriate. All materials in each grade are grade level appropriate but teachers are also differentiated an modifying with supplemental material in order to support their proficiency level, by simplying the material this will help close the gap. All ELLs from K-5 are serviced according to their mandated number of minutes required under CR Part 154. Beginners and intermediate are provided 360 minutes of ESL instruction and 180 minutes for advanced. They will receive at least 180 minutes of ELA instruction in the classroom. In addition, ELLs are provided with resources and academic differentiation appropriate with their levels. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? All ELLs in our school are part of the general education classroom, with the exception of our self contained Special Education classrooms with ELLs. As a result, all ELL students are afforded the same access to all materials and technology as any other student in our school, including our ELL students who are in Special Education classes. Every classroom in our school has technology, including SMART boards and computers. In addition, all classes are scheduled for additional time in the computer lab with their teachers where they engage in work on computer programs designated for their grade and ability levels, such as, iReady, Max Scholar, Imagine Learning, Head Sprout, and Brain Pop etc. In order to maximize student support, our techers supply ELLs with materials such as bilingual dictionaries and glossaries, audio books, phonics workbooks that support instruction. Reading Street by Scott Forseman is used to support English Language development. Our ESL program utilizes, books on tapes, posters, workbooks and picture cards depending on student proficiency levels. There are language-rich materials with picture supports to make the content and language comprehensible for beginners. We use Headsprout, an 1  internet-based reading program that effectively teaches the essential skills and strategies required for rapid reading success. For the intermediate and advanced we use the iReady program, which targets specific reading skills. In addition, to prepare ELLs for content-area State tests in math and ELA, the school provides workbooks, such as buckle down to specifically address skill-based needs.These materials are used to plan and design rigorous lessons aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards to meet the students' needs and expectations. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). In PS/IS 45 we hold a " Get Acquainted Night" , two weeks within the beginning of the school year for parents and teachers to get to know one and another. The administration and staff welcome the students and families to the school. Parents, staff and students talk about the upcoming activities for the school year with refreshments served. Teachers who speak Spanish were assigned to assist the Spanish speaking families during the activity. They will be given a tour throughout the school, highlighting the ENL room, computer room, and library. In addition, throughout the evening, parents are shown all the programs that ELLs are exposed to during the school day ( eg. iReady, Imagine learing, Head Sprout, Max Scholar). Parents and students will be given the opportunity to explore these programs in the computer room. Assessments and ELL requirements will be discussed, as well as answering any questions and concerns the parents might have. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? As a middle school we offer our 6-8 ELL students Spanish as an elective. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The ENL teachers attend staff developments throughout the year. Currently we are registered for two workshops: (1)Devleoping Academic Language for English Language Learners in Mathematics, (2) CR Part 154. Our PLC committee facilitate professional learning opportunities on a weekly bases for all teachers of ELL students and will work hand-in-hand with the ENL teachers to monitor the ENL program. The PLC committee are constantly learning new innovative ways and research-based instructional strategies that the ENL teachers use with rigorous instruction to meet the Common Core Learning Standards and Danielson's Framework. Some of the workshops already held incorporate the following domains from the the Danielson Rubric: (1e)Designing Coherent Instruction, (3b) Using Question and Discussion Techniques. Future workshops will cover and discuss these next domains (3c) Engaging Students in Learning, (3d) Using Assessment in Instruction, (4c) Communicating with Families, and (1f) Designing Student Assessment. Professional development will be done several times a year , for the entire school year, for teachers in order to help them better understand how to bolster the work with ELLs. The school provides professional development to school staff including assistant principals, guidance counselors, speech teacher, secretaries, parents' coordinator and all classroom teachers especially those with ELLs. These PD's are focused on Common Core Standards & Danielson's Framework, data-driven instruction and best practices for teaching ELLs in the regular classroom. School-based PD’s are usually provided every Mondays. The goal is to arm the classroom teachers with the tools and strategies that they will need to serve the English Language Learner population in their respective classrooms. The ENL 2  teacher shares with classroom teachers ENL strategies they could use in the class for ELLs. This will give the teachers some support in terms of differentiated activities they could use that’s appropriate for the ELLs proficiency level in the classroom. The school distributes survey or questionnaires to staff to determine what professional developments they need in terms of best practices, data analysis, curriculum standards and instruction. PD Calendar for the current school year is made on a monthly basis: It started in September and will continue throughout the school year. All Brooklyn North Workshops will be attended by two ENL teachers. All PS/IS 45 Workshops will be attended by all staff members (teachers K-8) October 19, 2016 Nuts and Bolts of Creating ELL Programs: Critical ELL Components of Compliance October 24, 2016 ELL Language Progressions (Brooklyn North) November 3, 2016 How to Incorporate Language Objectives into your Lesson Plans For Your ELL Students (PS/IS45) November 5, 2016 Title 1 Early Childhood Math & Reading Workshop (PS/IS 45) November 09, 2016 ELL Data Anaylsis Tool (EDAT) Professional Development (Brooklyn North) Janurary 09, 2017 Session I: Engaging English Language Learners:The most current trends to engage English Language Learners. (PS/IS45) January 21, 2017 Title I Common Core Math and Reading Fair (PS/IS 45) January 23, 2017 Session 2: Engaging English Lanugage Learners: The Most Current Trends to Engage English Language (PS/IS/45) February 06, 2017 How can we address student misconceptions to engage all learnerswithin ourclassrooms? (PS/IS 45) February 13, 2017 Utilizing Learning Progressions to Bridge Conceptual Thinking Gaps (PS/IS 45) March 04, 2017 Title 1 Math and Reading Common Core Workshops (PS/IS 45) March 06, 2017 Utilizing Learning Progressions to Bridge Gaps and Advance Learning Session II (PS/IS45) March 28, 2017 Overview of ELA, Math, and NYSESLAT state assessment (PS/IS 45 Workshops with the Multilingual Learner Institute will continue through the '16-'17- dates will be forthcomingWorkshops with Brooklyn North will continue through the '16-'17 - dates will be forthcoming 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The school Counselor offers a variety of programs to help students transition into middle school. The Counselor works with fifth grade students and ELLs individually and in small groups with navigating through the middle school articulation process, what to expect in middle school, becoming an organized student so that they are prepared for middle school, and with their concerns. The Counselor provides articulation information to the students like, middle school directories, testing dates, middle school open house information, auditions, new school openings, test registration and tickets, etc. The Counselor also nominates gifted and talented students to take specialized school entrance exams and auditions. In addition, he provides help with opportunities to fifth grade students to visit the middle school wing, meet Teachers, and learn about how middle school works. To meet the required professional development of teachers as per CR Part 154.1 and 154.2 adopted regulation, school has to provide professional development to all teachers and administrators that specifically addresses the needs of English Language Learners. Teachers are given the opportunity to attend PDs provided by the district and from the Office of English Language Learners or school-based especially PDs that address the Common Core Standards & Danielson's Framework, data-driven instruction and best practices. The school has to ensure that 15% of PD hours are provided to all teachers and 50% for Bilingual Education / ENL teachers receive PD hours that are specific to the needs of ELLs, co-teaching strategies, and integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. To further enhance effective instruction, the ENL teachers share with classroom teachers the ENL instructional and/or scaffolding strategies that they've learned in their PDs. This will give the classroom teachers the support they need in teaching ELLs in terms of differentiated activities appropriate to the proficiency 3  level of the ELLs in their classroom. ENL Teacher's records of agendas and attendance to the PDs are filed and kept in the school PD binder for record keeping, as well as in the ENL Binder. All Brooklyn North Workshops will be attended by two ENL teachers. All PS/IS 45 Workshops will be attended by all staff members (teachers K-8) October 19, 2016 Nuts and Bolts of Creating ELL Programs: Critical ELL Components of Compliance October 24, 2016 ELL Language Progressions (Brooklyn North) November 3, 2016 How to Incorporate Language Objectives into your Lesson Plans For Your ELL Students (PS/IS45) November 5, 2016 Title 1 Early Childhood Math & Reading Workshop (PS/IS 45) November 09, 2016 ELL Data Anaylsis Tool (EDAT) Professional Development (Brooklyn North) Janurary 09, 2017 Session I: Engaging English Language Learners:The most current trends to engage English Language Learners. (PS/IS45) January 21, 2017 Title I Common Core Math and Reading Fair (PS/IS 45) January 23, 2017 Session 2: Engaging English Lanugage Learners: The Most Current Trends to Engage English Language (PS/IS/45) February 06, 2017 How can we address student misconceptions to engage all learnerswithin ourclassrooms? (PS/IS 45) February 13, 2017 Utilizing Learning Progressions to Bridge Conceptual Thinking Gaps (PS/IS 45) March 04, 2017 Title 1 Math and Reading Common Core Workshops (PS/IS 45) March 06, 2017 Utilizing Learning Progressions to Bridge Gaps and Advance Learning Session II (PS/IS45) March 28, 2017 Overview of ELA, Math, and NYSESLAT state assessment (PS/IS 45 Workshops with the Multilingual Learner Institute will continue through the '16-'17- dates will be forthcomingWorkshops with Brooklyn North will continue through the '16-'17 - dates will be forthcoming Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? PS/IS 45K’s ENL program will provide parents and guardians of ELLs with written information and/or invitation letters are sent home to parents based on their preferred language, and current staff are used for translation as well to inform them of attending a one-to-one meeting witht the ENL teachers to discuss the progress and status of their child. The ENL teachers keep a log book of which parents they have met with. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. PS/IS 45 goal is not only to accommodate the students but also the parents. The schoool parent coordinator, Mrs.Shabazz and PTA regularly meet and discuss parents’ concern within the school community and plan activities that involve parents' active participation. Since parental involvement enhances student’s performance, the school ensures that ELL parents participate in all school activities. These activities include Get Acquanted Night, Family Fair, Father Bring Your Child to School Day, Father-Daughter Dance, Mother-Son Dance, Parent Workshops: Common Core, Preparation for State Tests (Math, Reading, and Science), Speech, Asthma, HIV, Nurition, and Question Preparation for Open School Night Workshop. During these celebrations or activities, families are invited and sent letters in their preferred language. This is done to foster closer relationship with all parents including parents of ELLs. All records, including agendas, attendance sheets, invitations to parents in their preferred languages will be kept in the ENL 4  binder. The records will be properly labeled so that records can be easily located when needed. Schedule of 2016-2017 Parent/Guardian Events September 20, 2016 Dad Take Your Child to School Day September 22, 2016 Meet The Teacher Night, 4:30 to 7:30 p.m. September 26, 2016 Kgn to 2nd Grade Picture Day September 27, 2016 3rd to 5th Grade Picture Day September 30, 2016 Pre-K Picture DayOctober 24, ’15 October 15, 2016 PTA Meeting, 9:30 a.m. October 19, 2016 Nuts and Bolts of Creating ELL Programs: Critical ELL Components of Compliance October 24, 2016 ELL Language Progressions (Brooklyn North) November 3, 2016 How to Incorporate Language Objectives into your Lesson Plans For Your ELL Students (PS/IS45) November 5, 2016 PTA Meeting. 9:30 a.m. Title 1 Early Childhood Math & Reading Workshop Movie Day for Students November 09, 2016 ELL Data Anaylsis Tool (EDAT) Professional Development (Brooklyn North) December 10, 2016 PTA Meeting. 9:30 a.m. December 17, 2016 Mother and Son Winter Wonderland Dance January 07, 2017 PTA Meeting. 9:30 a.m. Janurary 09, 2017 Session I: Engaging English Language Learners:The most current trends to engage English Language Learners. (PS/IS45) January 21, 2017 Title I Common Core Math and Reading Fair January 23, 2017 Session 2: Engaging English Language Learners:The most current trends to engage English Language Learners. (PS/IS 45) February 06, 2017 How can we address student misconceptions to engage all learners within ourclassrooms? (PS/IS 45) February 13, 2017 Utilizing Learning Progressions to Bridge Conceptual Thinking Gaps (PS/IS 45) March 04, 2017 PTA Meeting. 9:30 a.m. Title 1 Math and Reading Common Core March 06, 2017 Utilizing Learning Progressions to Bridge Gaps and Advance Learning Session II (PS/IS45) March 28, 2017 Overview of ELA, Math, and NYSESLAT state assessment (PS/IS 45) April 01, 2017 PTA Meeting. 9:30 a.m. . April 28, 2017 Mother and Daughter Brunch May 06, 2017 PTA Meeting. 9:30 a.m. Nomination & Election for 2017-2018 PTA Executive Board May 19, 2017 Father and Daughter Spring Dance June 3, 2017 Father and Son Sports Day (Wear Your Favorite Jersey) June 10, 2017 PTA Meeting. 9:30 a.m. June 24, 2017 Family Day Festival Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 5  6 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Tracey Lott-davis, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 7  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Horace E. Greene School DBN: 32K45 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Tracey Lott-Davis Title Principal Carleen Miller-Bailey Assistant Principal Debra Shabazz Parent Coordinator Janet Enriquez & Sandra Corder ENL/Bilingual Teacher Angelis Roberts Parent R. Walter 4th Grade Teacher/Subject Area R. Flores 3rd Grade Teacher/Subject Area Mary Ellen Waters Emily Chang Coach Coach Robert Benetos School Counselor Lillian Druck Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Idalie Davis (Speech) Other Related Services Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/20/16 6/20/16 6/20/16 6/20/16 6/20/16 6/20/16 6/20/16 6/20/16 6/20/16 6/20/16 6/20/16 6/20/16 8  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 32K045 School Name: Horace E. Greene School Superintendent: Lillian The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. 1. When newcomer students arrive at 32K045 for admission to our school, their parents are provided with a Home Language Survey (HLIS), to be completed. It will inform teachers, and the administration, of the students' first langauge and language used in the home. The ENL teacher will conduct an oral interview in the student's native language and in English for screening. After reviewing the HLIS survey, the ENL teacher will determine the students' eligibility for ESL services. Current languages in all grades: (K) Spanish, Turkman, Haitian-Creole (1 st grade) Spanish,Bengali (2 nd grade) Spanish, Arabic, Bengali, Tagalog, (3 rd grade) Spanish, Arabic, (4 th Grade) Spanish, (5 th grade) Spanish, Wolof, Bengali (6 th Grade) Spanish, Arabic, (7 th Grade) Spanish, French, Arabic (8 th Grade) Spanish, Arabic 2. We generate language reports from ATS, use the blue cards, parent survey, teacher survey by class, and interview the parents on "Meet With Your Child Teacher" Night/Parent Teacher Conferences. 9  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Prefered languages for both written and oral communication are: Spanish, Bengali, Arabic, Haitian-Creole, and French, 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Documents that our school provide parents that require translation are school newsletters, calendars, parent-teacher conference annoucements, as well as after-school programing, and parent orientation letters. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide All formal face-to-face meetings that our school tyically hold with parents throughout the school year are: Meet With Your Child's Teacher Night, interpretation service(s)? 0  Parent Teacher Conference, and Tuesdays' Consultation Meetings. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The Language and Interpretation poster is displayed at the main entrance of the school building and near the main office. The Parent Coordinator has Chancellor's Regulations A-663 translation documentation available in her office. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our school will conduct a parent survey in order to gather feedback from parents on the quailty and availabilty of services. 1 
