2018-19 RISE SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (R-CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 14K050 School Name: J.H.S. 050 JOHN D. WELLS Principal: BENJAMIN HONOROFF 2018-19 CEP-RISE 1  Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles Section 3: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 4: Rise School Narrative Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Community School Partnerships Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 10: Title I Program Information Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP-RISE 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: John D. Wells 14K050 6-8 183-South 3 rd Street 718-387-4184 School Number (DBN): 14K050 718-302-0230 Phone Number: Ben Honoroff Fax: BHonor@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Community School CBO: Principal: Community School Director: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Fiorella Guevara Ben Honoroff Lynn Hazen Bernardo Feliz Franklin Tapia Alejandra Estrella NA District Information Geographical District: 14 Alicja Winnicki Superintendent: 215-Heyward Street Brooklyn, New York 11206 Superintendent’s Office Address: awinnic@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-302-7600 Phone Number: 718-302-7978 Fax: Brooklyn North FSC: Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: Bernadette Fitzgerald 2018-19 CEP-RISE 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 131-Livingston Street BFitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-3954 Phone Number: 718-935-4314 Fax: 2018-19 CEP-RISE 4  Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles The Objective To guide, support and accelerate the early progress demonstrated by the schools graduating out of the Renewal program, as Rising Schools of Excellence (Rise), with a compelling theory of action, clear strategy for sustainment, targeted individualized supports, continued accountability, gradual release of responsibility, such that they independently accelerate their growth trajectory. Background Rise Schools have demonstrated: ● ● they have the will and conditions in place to accelerate student growth and meet school improvement benchmarks. they have the capacity to lead/implement a school improvement strategy. Rise Schools have seen some gains1 across multiple measures including graduation rates, college readiness, state test scores and attendance. As a result, these schools will fully transition out of the Renewal Schools program at the end of the 2017-2018 SY and continue under the guidance of the Office of Field Support, in partnership with the Office of School Support and Supervision. 1All Rise Schools met at least 67% of their benchmarks, are not on the State’s Priority list, and have demonstrated a sustainable school improvement structure that will allow them to build on their progress. Six Rise Keys for Continued Improvement 1. Strengthen the Instructional Core 2. Strengthen Instructional Leadership Capacity 3. 4. Apply a tiered approach to student intervention 5. Promote a positive, inclusive school environment for students, staff, parents and Improve Data Driven Practices community partners Increase monitoring and accountability 6. Theory of Action If the NYC Department of Education provides customized supports to Rise schools and principals designed around the “Six Rise School Keys for continued improvement” then, Rise principals and their teams will have the tools and resources to accelerate outcomes for ALL students and increase students’ access to an excellent and equitable education. Structure of the Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) The Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) will serve as the organizing and overarching document for each Rise school and will be directly aligned and developed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, and Strong Schools, Strong Communities, including the following: ● Rise Benchmarks: please refer to the 2018-19 Rise benchmarks provided to your school. ● Establishing an overarching summative vision aligned with elements of the Framework for Great Schools and documenting key areas of celebration and Rise through analysis of assessments and by envisioning what the desired outcome for each school will be at the end of the School Rise process. ● Setting mid-year point benchmarks that create the path for improvement by focusing on desired outcomes and goals. In this way, the plan will be mapped to the overarching summative vision. In addition to the five discrete goals formed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, each school will create an action plan. ● Transformation into a community school in order to increase student and family access to physical and mental health services and other social-emotional supports made available in or near the school. ● Expanded learning opportunities for all students, including additional instruction provided during afterschool and/or summer programming provided in collaboration with community partners. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 5  ● Intensive professional development for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and instruction aligned to the Next Generation Learning Standards (NGLS) and to support staff in effectively responding to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of all students. ● Additional, focused strategies to increase parent and family engagement. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Information on the Framework for Great Schools and the DTSDE Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and the R-CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 6  The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the American Institute of Research (AIR) Needs Assessment, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools – they call it a Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All Priority and Focus Schools and Focus 2018-19 CEP-RISE 7  Districts must use the new tool; and districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Education Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:  a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 8 a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC)  It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the R-CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the R-CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for R-CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists in every Rise school and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the American Institute of Research (AIR) needs assessment, the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Rise Key and the corresponding statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Discuss and respond to the guiding questions under each Framework element.  Step 5: Revisit your school’s current goals, and strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you have identified, and will let your school community know when you have reached your goal.  Step 6: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Complete the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and the Community School sections.  Step 9: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether strategies and activities outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust practices along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Rise Program Priorities Our Rise Theory of Action (page 4) is drawn from research1 on turnaround schools, the DOE Framework for Great Schools, DTSDE Tenets, and the Quality Review, which suggest that these key priorities have the greatest impact on student achievement. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 9  RISE Keys Priorities 1. Strengthen the Instructional Core 2. Strengthen Instructional Leadership Capacity 3. Improve Data Driven Practices 4. Apply a tiered approach to school support and intervention 5. Promote a positive, inclusive school environment for students, staff, parents and community partners 6. Increase monitoring and accountability  A clear focus aligned to students’ instructional needs, including college and career readiness  Access to common, standards-based curricula for all students, including ELLs and SWDs  Explicit and intentional embedding of culturally responsive Instruction in all content areas  Formative and summative assessments for all students in all grades that are aligned to curricula and produce clear evidence of learning  Tiered approach to teacher professional learning opportunities.  Partnership with families to increase engagement in students’ academic success  Implementation of a coherent vision for school improvement - a vision for leading learning, leading people, leading schools and leading change  Development of a system to support distributive leadership and build the capacity and sustainability of teacher leaders through continuous improvement  Developing leadership competencies, specific to turnaround efforts, including leveraging multiple stakeholders, a commitment to student learning and a sustained pursuit of measurable progress. Strategic allocation of resources to support instructional and professional learning plans and family engagement in leadership opportunities Integrative use of formative and summative assessment tools and practices to target resources and support throughout the year to achieve academic priorities    Ongoing analyses of school-wide and student-level data and adjustments to curricular resources and instructional moves  Prioritization of the use of standards and data to inform teaching and learning    Implementation of a tiered intervention system that engages teacher teams in frequent cycles of progress monitoring and adjustments to address diverse student needs School establishes coherent system, adopted by all to ensure that interventions are effective, differentiated and timely Increased use of teacher teams’ data-driven practices to accelerate student achievement  Clear strategy that establishes social norms within the school community and promotes a culture for learning with clear and high expectations for all students, in partnership with CBOs.  The sustainability of an environment where students feel safe, connected and engaged through practices that are culturally relevant and build their scholarly identity  The development of a whole school approach, in partnership with families, with   specific attention to social, physical and behavioral environments Social emotional learning practices embedded in teaching and learning as aligned to the Collaborative for Academic, Social and Emotional learning (CASEL) competencies and supported by CBOs. School leaders implement effective monitoring systems to ensure that instructional practices and interventions are monitored closely at the classroom, team, and school wide level  Establish effective teacher team practices that ensure teachers are accountable for data findings and set timely and appropriate interventions  Data analysis results in adjustments to the programs and priorities to better service   students Foster positive systems for accountability driven by reflection and action planning Support from district leaders to focus efforts toward results and problem solving actions that lead to turnaround success. 1. Darden/Curry PLE – Turnaround Leadership Competencies and Turnaround Action Shown to Influence Student Achievement 2018-19 CEP-RISE 10  Achievement Network – SY 18-19 Foundations Rubric COSEBOC Standards and Promising Practices for Schools Educating Boys of Color Harvard Graduate School of Education and Harvard Business School: Certificate in School Management and Leadership Learner-Centered Initiatives Multidimensional Principal Performance Rubric Monitoring and Accountability ● Rise schools will be monitored for implementation of the Rise Comprehensive Educational Plan (R+CEP) by Superintendents and Office of Field Support. ● Rise schools will be held accountable for making progress according to annual targets set by the Department of Education, as evidenced by their attainment of named benchmark scores for each annualized key metric. Schools not achieving annual targets by June 2019 are subject to additional oversight and consequences, to be determined at a later date. ● OFS will bring increased oversight and accountability by monitoring FSC supports to schools and ensure that these are aligned with the school’s instructional focus, student and teacher needs, and moving the school toward achieving interim goals. ● OSSS will monitor DSR oversight of all supports to Rise Schools. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 11  Section 3: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Directions: All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP). SLT members’ signatures indicates that they have been consulted with and given the opportunity to provide feedback on the plan and the plan’s alignment with the school-based budget to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Expanded Learning Time, Community School initiative, Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the second column. 2. 3. In the first column, indicate using an “X” if the person is an SLT member. In the third column, record the position and constituent group represented such as staff, parent, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), or other contributor. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 4. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the R-CEP, not approval. 5. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Signature (Blue Ink) Check if SLT X X X X X Name Position and Constituent Group Ben Honoroff Lynn Hazen Bernardo Feliz Bernardo Feliz FiorellaGuevara NA NA Represented *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Community School Director (staff) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two 2018-19 CEP-RISE 12  Check if SLT X X X X X X X X Name Position and Constituent Group Represented members required for high schools) Signature (Blue Ink) Matthew Mason Jason Warren Stephanie Batt Josephine Levine Owen Abergas Gabriella Castelan Joanne Romero Bernardo Feliz Maria Vasquez Edda Figueroa Valeria Paredez Staff Staff Staff Staff Staff Parent Parent Parent Parent Community School Parent Liaison Staff Parent Member/ 2018-19 CEP-RISE 13  Section 4: Rise School Narrative In a brief narrative, describe the current state of the Rise school addressing the following and please use existing data, where applicable: 1. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including your school’s mission statement and a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Identify any special student populations that the school has and what their specific needs are. 2. 3. Describe your school’s approach to family engagement and progress made with establishing families as partners in furthering student achievement 4. Describe how your school is leveraging community school partnerships to support progress in elements of the Framework for Great Schools and your Rise Benchmarks and indicate where this has been a challenge. 5. Summarize the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) opportunities that have been offered to your students this year. MS 50 is a small community school located in the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn. In 2017-2018, the school had 288 students, an increase of over 30% from the previous year. In 2018-2019, we anticipate another enrolment growth of over 10%. Our current demographics include 23% are English language learners, 38% are students with disabilities and 21% are former ELLs. We will have 7 general education classes; 3 self-contained classes; 3 ICT class and 1 bilingual (Spanish) class. Between 2015 and 2016, student enrollment has steadily declined at MS 50. One significant contributing factor is the changing demographics of the neighborhood. MS 50 is geographically in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, but our students and families are increasingly being drawn from the adjacent Brooklyn neighborhoods of Bedford-Stuyvesant, Bushwick, and beyond. This spread of MS 50’s enrollment pool is due to the massive gentrification that has gripped Williamsburg since the 1990s and gained significant momentum in the past 8 years. . This wider geographic spread of families has also contributed to a decline in student attendance, and a decline in parent participation. Our mission is to promote youth leadership through academics, arts, athletics, and activism and to empower student voice by providing opportunities for students to engage in inquiry-based and project-based learning. The instructional focus and theory of action for 2017-2018 will be that if we increase evidenced based argumentation (EBA) across content area and teach students to support their opinions with academic language, then we will see improved outcomes across content areas. MS50 includes many different populations of students. Students with disabilities receive instruction through either self-contained classes or integrated collaborative teaching classes with additional SETTS’s support. The needs of these students are identified through their IEPs. Reading comprehension is tracked through the Degrees of Reading Power given three times per year. Students who score at the at risk level on the DRPexam are given secondary diagnostics to identify phonemic awareness struggles. The Wilson/Just Words program is also being used to assist students with disabilities in the area of fluency and comprehension. Another large unique population in MS 50 are our ENL students who range in speaking English from beginners to proficiency as identified by the New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test. We have one full-time ENL teacher who supports students with attaining the English language. We provide ENL services through a comprehensive program, which includes a Transitional Bilingual Program for new arrivals and an ENL program with both push-in and pull-out service. Students who are at or above grade level are provided with enrichment activities and academic advancement classes including debate, robotics, computer coding, Regents Algebra, Regents Living Environment and Advanced Spanish The element of the Framework for Great Schools in which we have made the most progress over the last year is strong-family community ties and building a supportive environment that enhances our school community. As proud recipients of Mayor de Blasio Community Schools’ Grant, we have partnered with our long standing partner, El Puente. Together, we are achieving and making continuous progress supporting our families and students. El Puente Beacon Leadership Center is a free after-school program located inside the building. This program offers students Expanded Learning time opportunities in the following areas: Dance, Acting, Breaking, Vocal, Percussion, Health and Fitness, Stepping, Gender Groups, Cooking Clubs, Community Service Clubs, Homework Assistant, Tutoring, Sports, 2018-19 CEP-RISE 14  Baseball Clinics, Middle School and High School Transitioning Workshops. El Puente also works with ELA and Social Studies teachers through the Integrated Arts program weekly at MS 50. They incorporate visual arts to assist ENL students in developing their writing skills. Music is also being introduced to ENL students through BombaYo (a Spanish drum band) which is assisting in language instruction and cultural affirmation. This program has existed for over 10 years and has provided not only student but also parent support through adult education classes. The most significant challenges at MS50 remain in the area of rigorous instruction. However, by analyzing our data and feedback from various sources (Quality Review, Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness, and the American Institute for Research) we are strategically planning to incorporate new curriculum aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards. These data sources have assisted MS 50 in identifying the needs of our students along with formative as well as summative data collected throughout the school year. Additionally, MS 50 has initiated a series of strong partnerships with several community-based organizations and DOE approved grant resources as well as local businesses to strengthen the academic achievement of our students, the capacity of our teachers, and the involvement of our parents. These include the following: El Puente - El Puente has been a partner to MS50 since 1999; primarily as the in-house after-school program provider but also as a collaborator in numerous education advocacy and community development activities over the past 16 years. As a Renewal and Community School, we have an invaluable opportunity to more formally structure this partnership with El Puente. Through these initiatives, El Puente will support staff in implementing our advisory program, service the health and wellness needs of our students, help to organize and empower families, and lead our integrated arts project. As evidenced through our needs assessment, MS 50 has experienced a drop in enrollment, low average daily attendance, and a high chronic absentee rate. In partnering with El Puente, we are now able to provide social services for our students, parents, family members, and the wider community. El Puente will be supplementing our school’s enrichment opportunities through ELT, as well as through and their Beacon afterschool activities and Integrated Arts Projects that engage the community. Additional funding will allow El Puente to expand its Integrated Arts Project to reach every student at MS 50. For example, additional funding will allow El Puente to engage its resident mural group, Los Muralistas de El Puente, to create community murals on MS50’s large exterior wall on Roebling St. as well as on several interior school walls. In addition, funding will allow Los Muralistas not just to create the mural for the school, but to facilitate an interdisciplinary mural painting initiative. Students will gather oral histories in social studies, design mural proposals in ELA, study scaling in math, and analyze effects of erosion on different paints/surfaces in science. This community mural initiative will support our efforts to build community trust and increase attendance and enrollment rates. El Puente has a long and rich history in the community schools movement, founding their own community school, the El Puente Academy for Peace and Justice in 1993. Its success across multiple dimensions is well-documented, earning the school an honorable mention in the NY Daily News’ list of NYC Best High Schools (2014). The Middle School Quality Initiative (MSQI) - MSQI provides the framework for our literacy plan. We utilize MSQI Professional Development and in-school coaching to implement Word Generation, to provide the framework and curriculum for our Reading Is Transformational classes, and to help guide our teacher teaming. Teaching Matters - Teaching Matters will provide coaching and PD for mathematics and science. As evidenced by our needs assessment, NYS proficiency rates are low in mathematics. Teaching Matters coaches will provide direct coaching to math teachers in a gradual release model (modeling, co-teaching, observation with feedback). Teaching Matters coaches will work with individuals and groups of teachers to design, implement, and reflect on rigorous, differentiated, and standards-based lessons that promote student learning through improved instruction leading to increased coherence in curriculum implementation and increased scores on New York State math exam. Teaching Matters was chosen because of their expertise in math content and because of their capacity building professional 2018-19 CEP-RISE 15  development model. Teaching Matters science coach will also provide support for the new 8th grade/Living Environment teacher. 8th grade students will have the opportunity to sit for the Living Environment Regents course. New York City Urban Debate League (NYCUDL) - The NYCUDL will provide support for our ELT and after-school debate program. As evidenced by our needs assessment, ELA proficiency rate is low. A research study co-authored by MS 50 principal, Ben Honoroff, in his role as MSQI coach has shown that middle school students who participate in competitive debate have reading comprehension growth (as measured by the ) at significantly higher rates than their peers. The NYCUDL was chosen because of its proven track record of preparing debaters in New York City to compete at the highest levels of competitive debate. See Appendix 2a and 2b for Ben’s study, Literacy with a Purpose: Competitive Debate as a Tool to Improve Adolescent Reading Comprehension and Critical Thinking Skills. NYC Chess and Games - NYC Chess and Games provides chess instruction during ELT and lunch. As is evidenced by our needs assessment, math proficiency rates are low. Research has shown that regular involvement in chess increases academic outcomes. A 5-year study of 7th and 8th graders by Robert Ferguson of the Bradford, PA School district showed that test scores improved 173% for students regularly engaged in chess classes. Computer Science For All (CS4A) - Globaloria provides curriculum, training and support for our Strategic Reading (RIT) and ELT coding course. Coding has been shown to increase student performance in math. Computer Science For All was chosen as a partner to ensure that ELT meets the STEM needs of our students. Algebra For All - Algebra For All (A4A) provides training and support for integrating conceptual understanding, real life application and discourse into math classrooms. A4A also funds a summer Algebra bridge class for rising 8th graders. All 8th graders will have the opporutnity to sit for the Algebra regents. The Parent-Teacher Home Visit Program, (PTHV) - Our school is one of only 6 schools city-wide that visits the homes of our incoming students to establish relationships between the school, the parents, and the students. Chancellor Farina visited the home of one of our students along with, the ELA teacher and a representative from our CBO. Our school attended and facilitated a workshop at the National PTHV conference. Achievement Network (ANET) - ANETwill provide job embedded coaching to support in two areas. ANET will support math teachers around integrating conceptual understanding, real life applications and discourse into math classrooms, specifically providing job embedded coaching to the new 7th grade math teacher. ANET will also support the creation of a year-long PD cycle on race and equity, developed based on work begun in 2017-2018 (COSEBOC Conference, D14 Courageous Conversations cycle). NY Sun Work: Through a partnership this year with NY Sun Works , MS 50 has created a hydroponic green house where our students will have hands-on science experience and teachers will receive professional development on the appropriate science curriculum. We offer a rich array of classes during our ELT that are divided into three categories: enrichment classes (debate, robotics, computer coding, dance, band, anime, chess, painting, spoken word, podcasting, crocheting), academic 2018-19 CEP-RISE 16  advancement classes (Regents Algebra, Regents Living Environment, Advanced Spanish), and academic intervention classes (Wilson/Just Words, IXL Math, writing center). 2018-19 CEP-RISE 17  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 14K050 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 289 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 33 33 7 4 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 25 18 7 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 89.0% % Attendance Rate 83.4% % Reduced Lunch 17.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.7% 75.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.26 0% 5% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 35.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YSH N/A NO YSH Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 32 33 93.0% 5.9% 35.3% 21.1% 0.3% 0.7% 0 16% 10.3 25.3% 20% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YSH N/A N/A NO NO YSH N/A N/A NO YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP-RISE 18  2018-19 CEP-RISE 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. (aligned to Rise Keys 2 and 6) Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. (aligned to Rise Key 3) The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. (aligned to Rise Keys 1 and 4) Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. (aligned to Rise Key 1) 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? In 2017-2018, we focused on adopting CCLS aligned curricula in ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies and adapting the curricula to meet the needs of our students. We also implemented two inter-disciplinary curricula - Word Generation and Integrated Arts Project. Curriculum adaptation in ELA and Math was cited as a strength in our March 2016 Quality Review, while consistent rigorous implementation was cited as a need. We received a rating of proficient in rigorous instruction on our April 2017 QR, and a well developed in teacher support and and supervision, which was our area of celebration. Below are specific analyses from the April 2017 Quality Review are below: Strengths: Rigorous habits and higher-ord2018-19 CEP-RISE 20  er skills are found in lesson plans consistent across most grades and subjects. Lesson plans listed different strategies to engage a diversity of learners. For Unit and lesson plans 2018-19 CEP-RISE 21  contain modifications around multiple entry points. Most plans contain strategies for ELLs, including using glossaries, highlighting relationships between cognates in English and Spa2018-19 CEP-RISE 22  nish, and placing line numbers in reading passages. Students in most classes were able to think creatively, show innovation, and problem solve. There are opportunities 2018-19 CEP-RISE 23  for student-to-student dialogue, the use of academic vocabulary, and evidence-based accountable talk built into lessons. Most students can articulate what they are working 2018-19 CEP-RISE 24  towards, why it is important, and how it will help them later in life. Needs from March 2016 QR: - "While there are student-to-student discussions in some classes, lessons do not consistently facilitate discussions with all students demonstrating high levels of thinking. Teaching practices do not allow students to consistently engage in a productive struggle with challenging tasks." - "There are limited opportunities for students to participate actively in high-level peer to peer discussions and complete tasks that consistently demonstrate higher order thinking." Priority needs to be addressed in goal/action plan: In 2016-2017, we adopted CCLS aligned curricula in math and ELA. We will expand this work in the following ways in 2018-2019: 1. Adopt CCLS curricula in science (PBIS curriculum) and social studies (Passport to Social Studies). 2. Engage whole staff in PD around Making Thinking Visible text. 3. Develop instructional focus around giving students opportunities to demonstrate higher level thinking through academic peer to peer discussion on a daily basis. 4. Deepen implementation of Word Generation, inter-disciplinary academic language vocabulary curriculum. Measure language acquisition regularly, starting with pre-test and utilizing collaborative grading sessions. 5. Expand Integrated Arts Project to touch 8 classes. 6. Create and implement post state-Exam inter-disciplinary exit projects for each grade. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 25  Part 2 – Summative Vision for Rigorous Instruction What is your school’s instructional focus? What is your vision for promoting the instructional focus consistently across classrooms? Our instructional focus for 2017-2018 was driven by a theory of action (3.1) that holds that if we increase Evidenced Based Argumentation (EBA) across content areas and teach students to support their opinions with persuasive academic language, and give our students opportunities to make their thinking visible, we will see improved outcomes across content areas. Our instructional focus for 2018-2019 deepens this EBA vision by adding a theory of action that holds that if we integrate culturally responsive education (CRE) practices into our daily lesson plans, we will see richer peer to peer discussion, more thorough evidence based argumentation, and improved outcomes across content areas. This instructional focus will build on the EBA work that we began over the last three years by providing teachers concrete CRE strategies through a year-long PD cycle. This work began in June 2018 with a team of staff members attending the COSEBOC national conference in Boston, and is aligned to the District 14 Courageous Conversations principal focus group and the Equity Leadership PD series attended by the principal in August 2018. In June, 2017, we were selected to be a Showcase school for debate for the 2017-2018 school year. We will continue to a showcase school for schoolyear 2018-2019. How will you implement a standards-aligned curricula that meets the needs of your diverse learners, including ELLs and SWDs? We will utilize a curriculum that combines rigorous CCLS-aligned content area curricula with two research-backed interdisciplinary curricula (Word Generation and Integrated Arts Project) that draw literacy and arts threads throughout content areas. Because our needs assessment indicated that high expectations aligned to CCLS standards had been inconsistent and that a lack of a clear and coherent ELA curriculum was an impediment to CCLS alignment, our school community has made the strategic decision to adopt core curricula that has been recommended by the NYCDOE (Expeditionary Learning for ELA, and Big Ideas for math). For science and social studies we will adopt two new project/inquiry based curricula. For science we will use the PBIS curriculum and for social studies we will adopt the Passport to Social Studies curriculum. In 2016-2017, we partnered with Teaching Matters to hire a math coach and a science coach to support our teachers implementation of Big Ideas and PBIS. During the summer of 2017, our 7th and 8th grade social studies teacher attended Passport social studies curriculum training. For September, 2018, we hired a new science teacher who will attend the city-wide New Visions Living Environment PD in August. We will implement a Regents Living Environment curriculum in 2018-2019. As part of the Algebra For All initiative since 2016, we have been preparing our 2018-19 graduating cohort to take Algebra in the 8th grade. We will offer Algebra to all 8th graders in 2018-2019. All rising 8th graders were given the opportunity to take a 3-week summer Algebra bridge course, for which over 50 student registered. We will implement the Word Generation curriculum, an inter-disciplinary academic language acquisition curriculum that teaches five academic language focus words per week using a high-interest debate topic. Students are introduced to the five focus words a week and the debate topic in ELA on Monday, study a math word problem that integrates the five focus words and is about the debate topic in math on Tuesday, study a science experiment that integrates the five focus words and is about the debate topic in science on Wednesday, engage in a debate utilizing the five focus words in social studies on Thursday, and write a short response about the debate topic integrating the five focus words on Friday. Our bilingual class engages in Word Generation using text and focus words in Spanish. Our teachers receive Word Generation support from MSQI in the form of both PD and in-school coaching. Over 50% of our staff have attended Word Generation PD. We continue to partner with our Community Schools CBO partner, El Puente, to infuse what we call Integrated Arts Project (IAP) into classes across content areas. El Puente’s IAP includes a codified professional development/training curriculum to support teachers to work with teaching artists to create integrated lesson plans and theme-based projects 2018-19 CEP-RISE 26  that will enrich the math curriculum. The IAP model is especially fitting for our school population that is over 80% Latino. El Puente’s practice of social justice-rooted, culturally competent practice was the subject of a 4-year study by the National Latino/a Education Research and Policy Project (NLERAP) & the Center for Puerto Rican Studies at Hunter College. Their major finding was, through its integration of academics, social justice, youth development & the arts, El Puente’s model had a significant positive impact on Latino students’ academic success. We will also partner with El Puente to institute an advisory curriculum adapted from Puente’s Global Justice Institute advisory curriculum. We will also implement a parallel programmed strategic reading period school wide that we call RIT (Reading is Transformational). We use DRP results, secondary diagnostics, student interest and teacher recommendation to program students flexibly for RIT. Curriculum for our RIT class is derived from the MSQI We offer a Wilson/Just Words phonemic awareness class on every grade level to meet the needs of at risk readers during RIT. We believe that reading strategies are most effectively learned when aligned with student passions. Therefore, we will offer two interim based RIT classes where students will learn effective reading strategies within the context of content about which they have particular interest. We will offer a debate RIT class on every grade level. that creatively approach literacy by building on teacher passion and student choice. There will be a debate RIT class on every grade level, aligning with our instructional vision and our 2017-2018 Showcase School status. Teacher teams meet during common planning periods, weekly and also during content planning meetings every Tuesday and Thursday from 8:00-8:40 AM. On Monday morning professional learning takes place defining MSQI skills and strategies that are implemented across all grades and contents. What is your vision for ensuring that all student have access to rigorous coursework that moves them towards career and college readiness? How will you support the personal and academic skills, habits, and behaviors needed for students to be career and college ready? In addition to implementing the research based and CCLS aligned curricula described above, we will focus intensively on instruction, utilizing professional development, teacher teaming and external coaching. By focusing on instructional coaching and PD in ELA and Math, and by choosing partners with proven expertise and a track record of improving student outcomes in NYC (MSQI and Teaching Matters), we are confident that our teachers will better be able to assist students in deepening their literacy and numeracy as outlined by the six instructional shifts in ELA and Math. In the past, ELA teachers have designed their own units of study, but both the Quality Review and AIR report found that the CCLS alignment was inconsistent. We have therefore strategically chosen Expeditionary Learning as our reading curriculum because it provides detailed and thorough lesson plans with multiple entry and exit points for all learners, meticulous curriculum maps with consistent and coherent strategies and assessment protocols, and consistent alignment to CCLS. With the help of Teaching Matters coaches, our ELA department will dig deeply into Expeditionary Learning and analyze how they craft CCLS aligned units and lesson plans, using Expeditionary Learning’s curriculum structure as an exemplar for future teacher generated units of study. Teaching Matters and MSQI PD and coaching will help teachers balance literacy and academic texts, examining how and why Expeditionary Learning made text choices, and supplementing when necessary to achieve an optimal balance. Teaching Matters coaches will help our teachers understand the Expeditionary Learning assessment cycle which centers around text-based answers to increasingly complex questions. Teaching Matters coaches will also work with science and social studies teachers on disciplinary literacy, and we will use MSQI disciplinary literacy PD and coaching to help our social studies and science teachers teach our students to think and read like historians and scientists respectively. We believe, drawing on the research of Timothy and Cynthia Shanahan, that in social studies and science classes, our students should not just read about history and science, but “do” history and science, and become historians and scientists. We will work with content area teachers to achieve the literacy shift of increasing disciplinary specific knowledge. We will focus specifically on addressing the staircase of complexity in our RIT reading classes. The flexible nature of our RIT programming will allow us to meet the reading needs of all learners and continually push them up the staircase of complexity, while cultivating a love of reading. We will help our teachers master the difficult task of moving the reading levels of all readers. We will pay special attention to the ELA shift of academic vocabulary by implementing the Word Generation curriculum, drawing on the research of Catherine Snow and Isabel Beck, who have found 2018-19 CEP-RISE 27  academic language acquisition to be highly correlated to both reading comprehension growth and performance on CCLS-aligned state tests. In Math, Teaching Matters coaches will help our teachers achieve a deeper and richer understanding of the Big Ideas curriculum, working closely on pacing and depth of implementation, as was noted by our needs assessment to be lacking. In addition to providing PD, Teaching Matters coaches will follow a gradual release coaching model (modeling, co-teaching, observation with feedback) with our math teachers, demonstrating strategies to achieve the math shifts of focus, fluency, deep understanding and coherence across grade levels. We believe that embedding math teachers in our two interdisciplinary curricula (Word Generation and Integrated Arts Project) will help math teachers achieve the application and dual intensity shifts. Once a week, math teachers will engage in a Word Generation lesson that utilizes the five academic vocabulary words of the week in a word problem centered around the high interest debate topic of the week. This practice will increase students’ ability to comprehend and solve complex word problems and it will provide consistent application as students practice applying mathematical reasoning to weekly debate topics. Furthermore, when interdisciplinary teacher teams plan Word Generation units collectively, and social studies and ELA teachers encourage students to use mathematical reasoning and statistical analysis in their Word Generation oral debates and persuasive essays, our students will see real life applications of mathematical reasoning on a consistent basis. We will also include math teachers in our Integrated Arts Project, asking math teachers to coach students through finding connections between math and art. Our community mural painting project, for example, will have an important math application as students will be asked to use transformation, graphing, and scaling to in bringing the mural from design to larger than life reality. In 2016, we became part of the Algebra For All Initiative. Since then, 4 of our 6 math teachers have been trained during intensive summer training and 5 full day trainings during the school year in integrating conceptual understanding, real life applications, and discourse into the math classroom. In 2018-2019, we will partner with Achievement Network to provide job-embedded coaching to support Algebra For All learning. In 2017-2018, as part of our Algebra For All coaching, we divided our 8 periods of math per week into a 4:2:2 model with 4 periods of scope and sequence grade level instruction, 2 periods of "high-low" instruction (high ceiling low floor inquiry lessons), and 2 periods of personalized learning utilizing Khan Academy to bridge the gap between student numeracy and grade level standards. The heart of our RISE plan is our Expanded Learning Time (ELT). We will use ELT to infuse an element of student choice into the school day and to build on teacher and student passion. We will offer a rich array of enrichment classes (debate, robotics, computer coding, dance, band, chess, painting, spoken word, pod casting, crocheting), academic advancement classes (Regents Algebra, Regents Living Environment, Advanced Spanish), and academic intervention classes (Wilson/Just Words, IXL Math, writing center). Each student will get to select three choices for two ELT courses, one that meets Monday/Wednesday/Friday and one that meets Tuesday/Thursday. Students will be programmed for ELT by a combination of interest and need. Connections between our enrichment ELT classes and the shifts in ELA and Math are abundant. For example, debate class will help our students increase their diet of informational text, encourage text-based argumentation, practice using evidence from sources to inform and defend written arguments, and place high value on close reading of complex texts. Our robotics, video game design and chess classes will help students authentically practice the deep understanding, application, and dual intensity math shifts, as they apply math concepts to highly engaging enrichment activities. Pedagogical practices will align with the Danielson Framework for Teaching. We will engage in 6-8 week cycles of professional development on Monday mornings that reflect effective and highly effective teaching qualities in the classroom. Each cycle will conclude with a Learning Walk, conducted by the principal and teacher leaders to assess the effectiveness of the PD in enhancing instruction and teacher practice. Through a District 14 collaborative share of middle school inter-visitations, teachers will also observe highly effective practices that demonstrate students engaged in questioning and discussion in a classroom that is built upon respect and rapport. With the support of our Teacher Leader Coach, we will utilize our two model teachers and one peer collaborative teachers to create model classrooms and develop a routine of regular inter-visitations. In order to provide coherence across the school, we have established two regular teaming structures, horizontal grade team meetings, and vertical departmental meetings. Departmental teams will meet Tuesday and Thursday mornings from 8:00 - 8:40 and grade teams will meet twice weekly during C6 professional periods. Both department and grade 2018-19 CEP-RISE 28  team meetings will include collaborative planning, lesson studies, and analysis of student work. Teachers will work collaboratively to plan and implement coherent, common core-aligned lessons with appropriate multiple entry points in all subjects based on the analysis of student work. We will use the DRP to track reading comprehension, Wilson secondary diagnostics to track phonemic awareness for struggling readers, and Expeditionary Learning and Big Ideas baselines and benchmarks to track students progress toward mastery of Common Core ELA and Math standards. Teacher teams will track, analyze and monitor student progress using protocols for looking at student work periodic assessments and student work. After gaps have been identified, teacher teams will make adjustments to unit and lesson plans. Data analysis and academic needs of all learners will drive student flexible groups across classrooms, and flexible programming of RIT and ELT. The school leader will promote continuous professional development and support to ensure teachers have the capacity to strategically group students. Through the implementation of CCLS curricula, collaboration in teacher teams, and highly engaging enrichment, we expect 80% of our students to show measurable growth on both the New York State ELA and Math test by 4%. How do you envision embedding the elements of culturally responsive instruction and how will you know that implementation is successful? In 2017-2018 we began preparing for a culturally responsive teaching pd cycle in 2018-2019. We sent a team of 4 staff members to the COSEBOC training in May 2018, and they used learning from COSEBOC to design a whole-staff race/equity PD on the 2018 Chancellor's June Planning day. The team also created a plan for a five session year-long race/equity PD cycle for 2018-2019 utilizing Election Day, Chancellor's Day and three proposed half days. We will also continue the inclusive language lunch and learn series begun in 2017 facilitated by our Social Worker and RAPP Counselor. The workshop model is the common practices across classrooms and content areas. We envision the delivery of instruction to combine explicit instruction in the mini-lesson, with inquiry/project based learning that requires students to make their thinking visible, engage in peer-to-peer discussion, and form, articulate and defend evidence based arguments. We will also be continuing our implementation of Teachers College Writing Workshop curriculum, focusing especially on the argumentative writing unit. In 2017-2018, we adopted TC's genre writing philosophy, pairing genre writing units with Expeditionary Learning (EL) units based on the genre of the EL unit mentor text. We will continue to deepen this practice and investigate ways to weave the TC argumentative writing unit into all grades and contents to support our instructional focus and to meet the diverse writing needs of our students. We will continue our partnership with Teaching Matters to support our implementation of the Big Ideas math curriculum and the PBIS science curriculum. Teaching Matters will lead a summer curriculum writing workshop for teachers during the last week in August. We will also continue our partnership with MSQI, utilizing an MSQI literacy coach to support our EL implementation. Teaching Matters and MSQI coaches will work directly with teachers using an intensive coaching model (modeling, co-teaching, observation with feedback) to help ensure that delivery of instruction sets up all students for success. What is your vision for the use of a comprehensive assessment strategy (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, and summative) to drive curricular, instructional, and organizational decisions that impact student outcomes? Teacher teams work to adapt curriculum to provide multiple entry points and scaffolds to provide time for close reading of grade-level texts. For example, ELA teachers adapt EL curriculum to provide multiple entry points by providing leveled texts, accessing prior knowledge, building background knowledge, using visuals and manipulative, integrating art/music/theater, and providing evidence based argumentation opportunities. We will engage in 8-week cycles of professional development on Monday mornings that promote effective and highly effective teaching qualities in the classroom. Our first 8-week cycle will be designed specifically around language acquisition strategies to provide multiple entry points for all students to complex text. Strategies will include word walls, sentence starters, role signs, discussion protocols, use of one-to-one dictionaries/glossaries. Each cycle concludes with a 2018-19 CEP-RISE 29  Learning Walk, conducted by the principal and teacher leaders to assess the effectiveness of the PD in enhancing instruction and teacher practice. We utilize the DRP to measure reading comprehension growth. Students will take the DRP in September, January and June. Our large goal is to graduate all 8th graders reading on or above grade level (as measured by the DRP) by the 8th grade, and teachers will develop individual reading goals with each student to help increase reading comprehension. The ELA department will also continue their inquiry work from 2017-2018 analyzing student explanation of claims, adding an inquiry cycle around analyzing author's craft/author's choice. In math, we utilize Khan Academy to assess student grade level numeracy skills. Our large goal is to graduate all 8th graders with numeracy at or above grade level (as measured by Khan Academy) by the 8th grade, and teachers will develop individual math goals with each student to help increase numeracy skills. We have developed a system to record student Khan Academy levels (ex. 5.6 = 60% of 5th grade). We will record student Khan Academy level three times during the school year (September, January and June) to measure progress. How do you envision differentiating teacher professional learning opportunities to support instructional foci, meet students’ unique needs and advance culturally responsive education in your school? After reviewing teachers' advance ratings, teacher surveys, implementation of new school-wide initiatives and analysis of student work, a professional learning calendar is developed and modified based on teacher needs. We assign job embedded coaching MSQI, Teaching Matters, Achievement Net) to teachers to target teacher and student need. The entire staff will engage in a culturally responsive education PD cycle explained above. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By June 2019, all students will demonstrate a 4% gain in performance on the State ELA and Math assessments. This goal will be achieved by providing students with the skills and strategies needed through daily instruction through the implementation of standards based instruction. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal? Performance Index on State Math Exam Average Math Proficiency Rating Average ELA Proficiency Rating 2018-19 CEP-RISE 30  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Showcase School for Debate - We were selected to be a Showcase School for debate for the 2017-2018 & 2018-2019 school year. We formed a Showcase School planning team and two teachers applied and were accepted as Showcase Teaching Fellows. Our Showcase demonstrates discourse and Evidenced Based Argumentation strategies in ELA, Transitional Bilingual Home Language Arts, and Math, and serves as a demonstration site for promising practices for MS 50 staff and educators from across the city. Algebra 4 All - Create a pathway for all students to have the opportunity to take Algebra in the 8th grade beginning in 2018-2019. Four math teachers have attended A4A trainings, and have turnkeyed learning to the entire department, strengthening math instruction using Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All students ELA/Math growth Showcase Planning Team and Showcase Schools Central Facilitator Summer 2018 - June 2019. Two visits in January and April. All students. ELA/Math growth Sept 18- June 2019 All Math Teachers How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Team Planning Meetings, two visits, feedback from Showcase Schools Central Team Math team meetings. Interim Khan Academy assessments, and Algebra Regents. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 31  discourse strategies that build algebraic conceptual understanding. We also offered a three-week summer Algebra For All Bridge class to all rising 8th graders in July 2018. Small Group Math Tutoring. In 2017-2018, we partnered with Tutors on Wheels to provide small group math tutoring on every grade level. In 2018-2019, we applied to partner with Blue Engine to bring three permanent math tutors to work with 6th, 7th and 8th grade math classes, partnering with Ms. Batt and Mr. Mason. CPEC and CUBES - ELA and Math departments created argumentative writing and problem solving approaches to help students tackle complex texts and word problems. All students are assessed using the DRP to determine each student’s reading level and Khan Academy to determine each student's math level. As a result, instructional materials are selected and tailored to meet students’ needs and ability levels. This assessment occurs three times a year. The school has been programmed to add strategic reading periods in all grades called the RIT (Reading is Transformative) All Students ELA/Math growth September 2018 - June 2019 Ms. Batt, Mr. Mason, Math Department, Administration Interim Khan Math data All students ELA/Math growth September 2018 - June 2019 Department Leads, Teaching Matters coach, Administration Khan Academy and DRP data All students ELA/Math growth September 2018-June 2019 MSQI Coordinator, Jason Warren and Peer Collaborative Teacher, James Whitaker Team meetings around DRP and Khan Acadmey levels (Sept, January, June) All students ELA/Math growth September 2018-June 2019 ELA, social studies and science teachers. MSQI Coordinator and Peer Collaborative Teacher Analysis of DRP scores to compare impact of different RIT classes. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 32  period, with curriculum, pedagogy and framework guided by MSQI. LightSail . We will utilize LightSail, an online, Ipad based, reading system. We will implement Summer Sail, a program aimed at stemming summer reading loss where students get to take home Ipads over the summer and communicate virtually with a teacher about their reading. Stemming summer reading/math loss. Three parts to this plan: 1. SummerSail (see above). 2. Summer Reading packets - Every rising 7th and 8th grade student will receive a summer independent reading packet with instructions to read and log 30 minutes each night. ELA teaches will count the packet as the first project grade in September. 3. All rising 8th graders will have the opportunity to take a 3-week Algebra Summer Bridge class taught by three trained Algebra For All teachers. Culturally Responsive Education PD Cycle - All staff will attend a year-long CRE PD cycle developed based on learnings from the June 2018 COSEBOC training, the D14 Courageous Conversations initiative, and the DOE Equity Leadership PD Cycle. ELA/Math growth July 2018- August 2019 MSQI Coordinator Rising 6th and 7th grade students All students ELA/Math growth Summer 2018 ELA and Math Teachers DRP analysis to analyze impact of LightSail. September DRP analysis to evaluate impact on summer reading loss. All students. ELA/Math growth Fall 2018 Principal, Lead Teachers, All faculty. MOTP observation analysis. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 33 ELA/Math growth Spring 2019 Principal, AP, Lead Teachers, faculty DRP, Khan Academy, Saturday session exit slips 100 Targeted students based on mid-year assessments Saturday Program - We will provide small group ELA and Math instruction to students on Saturdays from February - May, utilizing mid-year periodic assessments to target specific student needs. We have set a goal of 100 students attending each Saturday session. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Throughout the schoolyear 18-19 , several parent workshops will be offered. During the first teacher parent night, our parents will be surveyed to determine the need of their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and NYS standards. The results of these surveys will be analyzed and an action plan will be developed. Workshops will be offered in the months of September, November, February, April and May. The school administration, parent coordinator, CBO director and several teachers. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. We will leverage resources from our Community Schools CBO partner, MSQI, District 14, the DSR, and Borough Instructional Specialists. We will also leverage coaching resources from the Teacher Leader office. We will use conceptual consolidation to maximize the impact of all funding streams. We will use flexible scheduling to maximize human resources of our staff. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. We will achieve an overall 2 point growth in each of our second two DRP administrations (January and June 2019). This growth will indicate that the school is progressing towards meeting our overall goal of moving student proficiency in both ELA and Math as reading comprehension levels have shown to correlate to state test results. We 2018-19 CEP-RISE 34  will also use the DRP and Khan Academy to monitor progress in ELA and Math. We will achieve a 2% growth in ELA and Math levels between September 2018 and January 2019. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Degrees of Reading Power exam, Khan Academy, teacher created periodic assessments. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 35  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. (aligned to Rise Key 4) 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. (aligned to Rise Key 4) 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. (aligned to Rise Key 5) X 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. (aligned to Rise Key 5) Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 5. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? In the school year 2016-2017, the school leader and community school director implemented several systems and programs to address the social and emotional developmental health needs of students. Systems & Structures: The leadership team began to create a cohesive system where there would be avenues for referral and follow-up. This all begin with the adults who had the most interaction with students: the teachers. They would meet twice weekly in grade team meetings to discuss student academic and social-emotional strengths and struggles. They collaborated on solutions to ensure that they were attempting several strategies before the referral process began to one of 3 teams: pupil personnel team (academic interventions; student with disabilities), student success team (attendance) and CARE team (any other social-emotional need). Before referral, the Director of School Environment will utilize crisis and behavior strategies to diminish behaviors and keep students on track to success. The weekly pupil personnel team (PPT) meetings were attended by the guidance counselor, school psychologists, social worker, substance abuse prevention intervention counselor, and principal where they review referral forms from teachers and allocated services. The student success team that focused on attendance consisted of the guidance counselor, school aide, parent coordinator, principal, district attendance teacher, El Puente Community School Director, El Puente Success Mentor Coordinator and a social worker from Partnership with Children would also meet weekly. The CARE team is our largest team and it consists of representatives from both of those groups. They met weekly and the role of these members were to act as 2018-19 CEP-RISE 36  case managers and ensure that follow-up occurred. This team utilized a color-coded system to analyze how long students had been under their care and ensure that they received supports in a timely manner. This team also developed a database of quality resources for referral. In addition, all of the students were part of advisories each week that focused on building social-emotional skills. El Puente Global Justice Institute provided an advisory curriculum that teachers utilized and modified. Through our partnership with “Partnership with Children”, a social worker was able to utilize this curriculum and create tools and lesson plans for teachers to utilize that were aligned with our school values. In the upcoming year, we will continue to work on strengthening each of these teams and decreasing the amount of time that students spend under the referral of each specific team. We will also create systems to track student interventions and analyze how well an intervention worked. We have already begun creating “Student Profiles” through our attendance work and would like to extend that to all MS 50 students. Programs & Partnerships: This past year, several mentoring programs were created:  Reading with Friends- High school and college students mentored students through reading and discussing literature together.  Debate- MS 50 students mentored Arbor elementary students through debate practices   Peer mediators- 13 peer mediators were trained by SAPIS worker & social worker in conflict resolution; began Sports- Through basketball, soccer and volleyball, students received mentoring from adult coaches  student-to-student mediation Success Mentors- chronically absent students were identified through New Visions student sorter and paired up with adult mentors who monitored their attendance daily and applied strategies to motivate students to come to school. In Jan 2016, we had 14 severely chronically absent students. We have reduced that to 8 severely chronically absent students as of 6/10/16. We will continue each of these programs and work to strengthen and increase their reach. We will work closely with students and staff that were involved in each of these to understand the impact of each of these programs and how we can begin to measure its success. We partnered with several organizations to foster social-emotional learning at MS 50, which include El Puente Beacon, Global Justice Institute, Community Schools Team and Leadership Centers; Partnership with Children; Ramapo, Jewish Board and Attendance Works.  El Puente Beacon: provided academic and recreational programs and homework assistance. A pillar of the Beacon is their membership process where students learn about El Puente and deepen their connection to the social justice movement. We have begun to model this membership process and will continue to implement next year.  El Puente Global Justice Institute: provided training to guide the values creation process and curriculum guides for advisory.  Partnership with Children: a social worker came two days a week to launch peer mediation, advisories support, restorative justice practices and to support the CARE team  Ramapo: provided coaching for teachers as well as led 3 student overnight retreats to upstate New York where students learned about communication and teamwork skills. Jewish Board: A student loss & bereavement group was held at school for students.   Attendance Works: provided training to launch Success Mentoring at MS 50 Our partnerships have been invaluable this year and we will continue to foster linkages with these organizations. Next year, we will begin to convene providers so they are aware of each other and can begin to work collaboratively. In addition, we need to foster stronger partnerships with organizations where we are referring students. This would include regular meetings with our contacts in these institutions to be able to follow up about our high priority students. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 37  Shared Values & Mission: Through advisory, professional development sessions and Parent-Teacher Association meetings, staff, parents and students were asked which values would foster student success now and in the future. Then stakeholders voted on those values and five were chosen: Peace & Justice, Respect, Innovation, Determination, and Empathy. Throughout the year, school-wide assemblies, advisory lessons and celebrations were held to foster unity through the values. Individuals who demonstrated those values received a bracelet with the name of the value on it. There is more to work to be done to integrate the values into our daily practices, but we are on our way. Next year, we will work on developing daily systems to reinforce these values and create avenues for students, staff and families to lead this work. The combination of creating better systems to monitor social-emotional development and attendance, implementing a variety of mentoring programs, deepening our partnerships and creating school values has resulted in our attendance rising from 88% to 93%; fewer high-level incidents reported in OORS and students self-reporting that they are happier to be at school and are learning the necessary skills to have successful relationships. This work will continue during the school year 2018-2019. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Supportive Environment What is your vision for a supportive school environment? How will you, in partnership with each CBO and families, enact your vision? The MS50 community would like stakeholders to describe our school as a welcoming and vibrant environment that supports the learning of the whole child with the collaboration of all school community members. We are a community of learners with high expectations for instructional leaders, teachers, parents and students. As a team we embrace and provide all students with the tools to become college and career ready. In order to ensure the best conditions for teaching and learning, we want to become a school that has clear and consistent rules and expectations that were created collaboratively with families, staff and students; where social and emotional learning is just as important as academic learning; and where all school members including staff, parents and students foster and exhibit our shared values and mission. The partnership with the community based organization, El Puente, began 16 years ago. The foundation of this partnership has typically been the El Puente Beacon Leadership Center, which has provided all students with free after-school programs located inside the building. Specifically, students had the opportunity to join the following programs: Dance, Acting, Breaking, Vocal, Percussion, Health and Fitness, Stepping, Gender Groups, Cooking Clubs, Community Service Clubs, Homework Assistant, Tutoring, Sports, Baseball Clinics, Middle School and High School Transitioning Workshops, and Teen Action Program. In the past years, other programs in El Puente have become embedded into the infrastructure of MS 50. Currently, El Puente Global Justice Institute works with the ELA and Social Studies department through the Integrated Arts program on a weekly basis. They are incorporating visual arts to assist ELL students in developing their writing skills. Music is also being introduced to ELL students through BombaYo (Spanish drum band), which is assisting in language instruction and cultural affirmation. The El Puente Community School Team has become embedded in the daily life of MS 50 and provides a variety of supports during the school day. This includes increasing attendance through Success Mentoring; fostering parent leadership through Parent Academic Teacher Teams, Parent-Teacher Home Visits and Parent-Teacher Association; increasing student voice and leadership through Extended Learning Time and Student Government and increasing social-emotional learning and partnerships at MS 50. The following year will be a continuation of the structures and programs that we have created this year, but will include additional work on: 2018-19 CEP-RISE 38   Creating a discipline code that has a clear set of rules of expectations. The Community School Team has already worked with us to ensure that the uniform and cell phone policy were created collaboratively and will do so for other policies as well. Strengthening the advisory program through homeroom structure and by providing professional development through Partnership with Children and El Puente Global Justice Institute.   Expanding all mentoring programs to include more students: Success Mentors; Peer Mediators; Sports Mentoring  Creating student support groups such as newly-immigrated students, depression, obesity, etc. To deepen our work with creating a supportive environment to incorporate the social-emotional learning of all students, MS 50 will work closely with the El Puente Community School Team to best leverage the resources and staff within El Puente and other partnerships. MS 50 will adopt strategies from the Restorative Justice model to address the roots of student misbehavior and willingness to rethink and rework in all classrooms. Collaboratively, all stakeholders will work strategically to create strong ties among teachers, parents and students through a social justice curriculum that will show progress toward building a genuine community of learners. The school community of MS 50 will also incorporate workshops and programs provided by the Office of Safety and Youth Development, on the topics of bullying, cyber-bullying and social emotional development. This training is being done through the partnership of El Puente. Our school will continue to work in partnership with El Puente to implement an advisory program embedded in the student schedule. Each teacher will teach one advisory of 12-15 students. El Puente staff will work with our new School Based Support Team (SIT Team) and teachers to design an advisory curriculum based on El Puente’s Global Justice Institute Advisory Curriculum. Twice weekly, teachers will meet in advisory team meetings and engage in a “kid talk” protocol designed to surface academic and social strengths and challenges SIT team members will participate in all advisory team meetings and will use information from “kid talk” protocols to design and implement student supports. The Advisory will be designed to support student’s socio-emotional needs as identified by data collected from advisory team meetings and SIT supports. Additionally, advisories may integrate El Puente’s signature HIP (Holistic Individualized Planning) Process, which is an individualized goal-setting, planning, mentoring & self-actualization process to engage students in generating their own information to track progress towards academic, personal, or community goals. The school will continue to nurture a school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. This will be supported by regular review of advisory and SIT data and collaborative efforts to track academic and social progress for all students, including at-risk students. MS 50 and El Puente will partner to staff our ELT, leveraging the skills, expertise, and passions of both El Puente Teaching Artists and MS 50 faculty to create a Community School model that nurtures and develops the skills and passions of our students. MS 50 and El Puente will also leverage local health service provider relationships (that may include the Puerto Rican Family Institutes Brooklyn Mental Health Clinic and Woodhull Hospital) to provide medical, and psychological care for our students. MS 50 and El Puente will also partner in monitoring student progress, and planning for performances and competitions. The means by which we will assess this objective is positive results on student surveys. This goal will also be supported through the newly established School Implementation Team, (SIT), El Puente’s HIP project, and the twice weekly advisory program - all of which will address issues of attendance and goal setting for students. By meeting student’s social, emotional, academic and creative needs, we expect to see great gains in student attendance. Describe your plan to implement a culture of trust and high expectations for teachers, students, families and community partners.  In May 2018, a team of MS 50 and El Puente staff members attended the training in Boston. The team implemented strategies to design a whole-staff race/equity PD on the 2018 Chancellor's June Planning day. The team also created a plan for a five session year-long race/equity PD cycle for 2018-2019.  Yale ruler training for the administration - implementation of training all staff members  College access for all - All 7th grade students will attend a college trip. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 39  Who are your CBO partners? How will each CBO sustain and support the social-emotional and academic growth of your students? CBO Partner CBO Focus El Puente Beacon & Global Justice Institute After school academic, sports and recreational program. Professional development; curriculum development Partnership with Children Additional staff support weekly to implement restorative justice practices; create a peer mediation program; advisory and CARE team support. How will you, in partnership with your CBO, create a supportive and engaging environment for your students’ families? Our work this past year has demonstrated that families are ready and willing to become more integrated into the school environment. We will continue to build trust through Parent-Teacher Home Visits as well as continue to ensure their engagement through interactive Parent-Teacher Association meetings where they get to provide input about school policies as well as propose new policies that will create a better learning environment for our students. The El Puente Parent Advocate and Community School Director provided a tremendous amount of support with this last year and will continue to create a foundation for transformative parent engagement and leadership. What essential questions, or key themes, will be explored by all staff and students that acknowledge and celebrate the culture and heritage of the student body? How do you teach about diversity, culture and identity at home and in the classroom? What evidence will you use to gauge the impact of your plan to create a positive school environment? Relevant School Environment Survey questions. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Supportive Environment. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By June 2019, there will be a 2% decrease in suspensions. This will be accomplished through creating a more supportive environment, increasing student choice and implementing highly engaging enrichment programs. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal? Attendance Benchmark. n/a n/a n/a 2018-19 CEP-RISE 40  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All students Suspension Reduction September 2018- June 2019 Social Worker, SAPIS Counselor, Administration Attendance August, 2018- June, 2019 At risk students from all sub group categories Administration, Parent Coordinator, Attendance Teacher, SAPIS Counselor, RAPP Counselor, Mandated Service Providers; Teachers, SWD Teachers and ESL Peer Mediation Program. In 2016-2017, we piloted a peer mediation program that trained 15 students who conducted 30 peer meditations. We will expand this program in 2018-2019 and create more dialogue between advisory (dean) and peer mediation liaison to increase opportunities to use peer mediation to solve student conflicts. At MS 50, we renamed our Pupil Personnel Team to a more fitting name: The CARE Team stands for (Children Are Reason Enough). The team’s goals are to identify students’ challenges and match them to the appropriate network of support (in-school and/or external partners) to deliver specific interventions. This team is made up of the principal, parent coordinator, attendance teacher, SAPIS (Substance and alcohol Prevention/Intervention Services) counselor, RAPP counselor (Relationship Abuse Prevention Program); plus participation from: Mandated Service Providers How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program)Hirin Analysis of OORS reports, suspension data, and section sheets. Decrease in OORS incidents. Internal CARE Team monitoring document shows progress for individual students. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 41 Attendance ELLs and SWDs students August, 2018- June 2019 El Puente Community School Program Decrease in OORS reports. (speech/hearing specialists, Special Ed. teachers. Integrated Arts Project - Specific Targeted/High Needs Student Interventions for ELL students at MS 50 have been designed by El Puente to continue and build upon their pilot Integrated Arts Project. In the 2016-2017 school year, this program was extremely successful in engaging these targeted 6 th grade students in structured arts instruction (w/professional teaching artist) that was integrated into their ELA class. The language acquisition skills , arts instruction, as well as the culminating presentation, were highly motivational for participating students’ level of engagement and attendance. Through the Community Schools Initiative, we will expand this program to work with our ELL students across the 6 th , 7 th , and 8 th grades. Additionally, we would also like to expand to other arts’ disciplines that would support both our cultural vision, and our STEAM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts, and Mathematics) initiatives, such as dance, music, or visual arts (studio arts, photography, and film/video). Through the Community Schools’ Grant El Puente will support and expand the MS 50 mentoring program by supplying young adult mentors to work with our at-risk students. Make daily home contact via the automated School Messenger system for all students absent and late each day. In addition home visits All Students and a sub-group of chronically Attendance September, 2018- June, 2019 Parent Coordinator; Student Success Team (attendance) Increase in attendance. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 42  will be conducted for students with chronic absenteeism. absent students Advisory/Homeroom - All students are scheduled for am and pm homeroom daily and advisory with their homeroom once per week. Two staff members are matched with each homeroom to provide a small student to teacher ratio and allow for small grouping during advisory. Advisory curriculum is developed to align with our PRIDE Core Values (Peace and Justice, Respect, Innovation, Determination, Empathy). Advisory lessons are distributed weekly at Monday PDs. Expanded Learning Time will add student choice to the school day. Students will be allowed to choose two classes of interest, one that meets WF and one that meets TR. Classes will be a combination of enrichment, academic advancement and AIS. PRIDE Core Values - Students in advisory, teachers in PD and families in PTA /SLT developed a set of core values (Peace and Justice, Respect, Innovation, Determination, Empathy). Advisories study these values and write testimonials for student/staff/community members who embody these values. PRIDE bracelets are awarded at monthly PRIDE award ceremonies. We will hire a new community associate to support this work. Creation of college access support programs. We will join the College Access for All program and create a partnership with Ithaca College where IC students All students and staff Attendance September, 2018 - June, 2019 Social Emotional Learning Team, Community Schools Director, Parent Coordinator, Principal Increase in attendance. Attendance All students. All staff All staff September 2018- June 2019 Increase in scholarship data and attendance. Attendance All students staff and families Advisors September 2018- June 2019 Increase in attendance 7th grade students. Attendance September 2018 - June 2019 Two teachers advisors - (7th grade ELA) and (6th grade math). Community School Director leads initiative. Increase in attendance and scholarship data among mentees. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 43 Attendance All advisories. Student council. September 2018-June 2019 Community School Director, Student Council advisor, Principal. Increase in positive student responses on learning survey. mentor a group of 7th grade MS 50 students. Creation of student government. Each advisory will elect one "class representative." Advisors will engage students in a series of lessons around student government and interested students will apply and deliver speeches to their advisory. Students elected classroom representatives will meet to determine roles (president, vice president, secretary, treasurer etc). Class representatives will meet monthly with the principal during lunch. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Throughout the schoolyear 18-19 , several parent workshops will be offered. During the first teacher parent night, our parents will be surveyed to determine the need of their understanding of Supportive Environment. The results of these surveys will be analyzed and an action plan will be developed. Workshops will be offered in the months of September, November, February, April and May. The school administration, guidance counselors, CBO director and several teachers. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. We will leverage resources from our Community Schools CBO partner, MSQI, District 14, the DSR, and Borough Instructional Specialists. We will also leverage coaching resources from the Teacher Leader office. We will use conceptual consolidation to maximize the impact of all funding streams. We will use flexible scheduling to maximize human resources of our staff. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 44  Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. MS 50 CARE Team will monitor the student data of incidents and attendance bi-monthly. Based on specific need we will provide outreach to students and their family through the various components of the CARE team. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. CARE Team tracker, OORS data, section sheets. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 45  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. (aligned to Rise Key 2) 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. (aligned to Rise Key 1) x 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. (aligned to Rise Key 4) 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). (aligned to Rise Key 3) Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? We received a preliminary rating of proficient in Teacher Teams on our April 2017 QR. In our March, 2016 QR, 4.2 - teacher teams and leadership development - was our area of celebration. The QR noted the following strengths and needs: Strengths Teachers meet in different ways across 2018-19 CEP-RISE 46  the school, including in departmental and grade teams, as they utilize protocols to unpack curricula and examine student work products to inform curricula adjustments and lesson 2018-19 CEP-RISE 47  development. Teachers collaborate using a shared Google Drive to upload curricula, lessons, resources, and on-going action plans related to their work. Teacher team work has hel2018-19 CEP-RISE 48  ped the school to develop instructional tasks based on the results from the DRP. In addition, inquiry work revealed that students needed more hands-on manipulatives and specific 2018-19 CEP-RISE 49  strategies to help them work on complex tasks. Needs from March 2016 QR: - High-level peer to peer discussion was inconsistent across classrooms. - The practice of inviting students to comment on responses given by their peers was not routinely invoked. - In some classes discussion mostly consisted of teacher-student question and answer sessions. Attendance: - Increase of 3%. Decrease of chronic absenteeism by 14%. Enrollment: Increase of over 35% Part 2 – Summative Vision for Collaborative Teachers What is your vision for collaborative teaching? In order to provide coherence across the school, we have established two regular teaming structures, horizontal grade team meetings and vertical departmental meetings. Departmental teams will meet once a week and grade teams will meet twice per week during C6 professional periods. One of the grade team meetings will be focused on meeting the needs of special education students. This will be a new meeting structure for 2018-2019, that came about because of our analysis of student growth data. In this meeting, each grade team will review two students' IEPs per meeting, discussing the writing of high quality IEPs and discussing strategies to meet the needs of each student across content areas. Department and grade team meetings will include collaborative planning, lesson studies, and analysis of student work. Teachers will work collaboratively to plan and implement coherent, common core-aligned lessons with appropriate multiple entry points in all subjects based on the analysis of student work. We will use the DRP and Khan Academy to track reading comprehension and math skills, Wilson secondary diagnostics to track phonemic awareness for struggling readers, and Expeditionary Learning and Big Ideas baselines and benchmarks to track students progress toward mastery of Common Core ELA and Math standards. Teacher teams will track, analyze and monitor student progress using protocols for looking at student work periodic assessments and student work. After gaps have been identified, teacher teams will make adjustments to unit and lesson plans. Data analysis and academic needs of all learners will drive student flexible groups across classrooms, and flexible programming of RIT and ELT. The school leader 2018-19 CEP-RISE 50  will promote continuous professional development and support to ensure teachers have the capacity to strategically group students. Teachers will work with Teaching Matters and MSQI coaches to collaboratively plan and implement coherent, common core-aligned lessons and units with appropriate multiple entry points in all subjects based on analysis of student work and data. Teachers will meet 4 times weekly in both vertical departmental teams and horizontal grade teams, to plan curriculum, analyze student work, share best practices, ensure innovation, and ensure student academic and social-emotional growth. Teaching Matters coaches will work with content area teams to design units, lessons, assessments and projects, ensuring coherence and alignment to CCLS standards. The means by which we will assess this objective are collaboratively produced teacher products such as curriculum maps, unit plans, and common assessments (both on-demand and project based). Teaching Matters coaches will use a gradual release facilitation model to build the capacity of teacher leaders in facilitating collaborative team meetings, Classroom teachers will plan thoroughly and provide thoughtful and timely feedback to students. Differentiated instruction will provide multiple entry and exit points. Teachers will constantly analyze curriculum making refinements and adjustments as necessary to include all students. Data will be used to guide instructional decisions at both grade and across curriculum. Instruction is further modified through school leader feedback gathered during observations. Lesson plans will be developed from Expeditionary Learning as the base literacy program and Big Ideas as the Math program which are CCLS aligned and provide multiple entry points for students. These units of study are altered in order to address student needs, by teachers with the end goal in mind. Adjustments are made during grade and content team meetings using a common assessment template with real-time data. As indicated in all the data collected this past year (AIR, QR,IIT) planning is inconsistent. Starting September 2017, time will be programmed for common planning, in order to assist teachers in developing cohesive lesson plans and units of study. Teachers will provide opportunities to deepen learning for higher achieving students through project based instruction. Our Integrated Arts Project (IAP) in partnership with El Puente, will provide students with the opportunity to engage in inquiry based learning with professional teaching artist. ELT will also provide opportunities for both academic advancement (Algebra Regents, Living Environment Regents, Advanced Spanish) and enrichment classes that support literacy and STEM standards (Debate, Spoken Word, Robotics, Computer Coding). Our implementation of Word Generation, an inter-disciplinary academic language acquisition curriculum will also allow for inter-disciplinary teaming meeting around a common weekly student outcome (argumentative essay integrating academic language focus words). How do you envision enhancing collaboration amongst your Instructional Leadership Team to improve teacher practices and student learning? We have developed 3 teacher leader positions. The teacher leaders, along with the school administration and Community School Director, make up the instructional cabinet . This instructional cabinet met 2-3 times per month after school. We found that this meeting time was essential to create alignment and coherence across content/grade teams. In 2018, we will carve out a meeting time during the contractual day for the instructional cabinet to meet weekly. This consistency will allow for the coherent implementation of strategies to improve teacher practice and student learning, as team leaders will take strategies from instructional cabinet meetings back to their teams for implementation and will allow for collective monitoring of effectiveness. How do you envision collaboration within teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? Teacher teams operate under a philosophy of teacher empowerment and distributive leadership. As described above, each team is led by a teacher who is part of the instructional cabinet that will meet regularly with school leadership. Teacher teams use protocols (strengths and gaps, looking at student work, kid talk etc) to promote equity of voice and 2018-19 CEP-RISE 51  focused, data-driven analysis. Team leaders prepare agendas and minutes to record progress and monitor meeting effectiveness. We also engage in an intensive coaching model (modelling, co-teaching, observation with feedback) using both teaching matters coaches for science and MSQI coach for literacy. How do you envision collaboration across teacher teams to improve data driven teacher practices that result in improvement in student achievement? What data will teachers and the Instructional Leadership Team regularly review to ensure that they are reflecting upon needed adjustments to teaching practices and meeting individual student learning needs? Data Reviewed DRP/Khan Academy , Student Work, IAP surveys, Word Generation weekly essays, IEPs , ongoing formative data, and periodic assessments. Lesson Plan Study Reading comprehension/math, IAP survey - arts /engagement, WG - language acquisition, IEP - individual student needs. Intent Lesson plans will be revised once data is collected. Weekly essays will be used to as cornerstones for lessons, with adjustments included for SWD and ENL students. Weekly grade team IEP meeting Planning and preparation to include the use of varied instructional strategies to meet student needs as identified by ongoing formative data. Describe the screening process you use to identify students who need extra help? How do you use this process to determine which intervention to provide? During teacher team meetings, conversations are centered around student progress. Utilizing the datawise protocol, teachers analyze student work to determine instructional next steps. These next steps will move students closer to acquisition of content. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By June 2019, we will increase opportunities for teachers to collaborate around specific student needs, with special focus given to meeting the needs of students with disabilities by creating four regular teaming structures in teachers' contractual school day (department teams, grade teams, SIT team and CARE Team). This goal will be measured by an increase of 4 points (twice the national average) of students with disabilities on the DRP. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 52 Framework: Collaborative Teachers Framework: Rigorous Instruction 2018-19 CEP-RISE 53  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Creation of new teacher collaborative led by 6th grade model teacher who will hold regular support meetings for new teachers. Using a collaborative inquiry approach data will be analyzed by all teachers in department and grade teams to support instructional practices that meet established student and school-wide goals. This includes student both formative and summative data. Teachers along with the CBO work with students on this data to identify individual student goals. Teaching Matters, Math Solutions, and MSQI coaches will work with ELA, math and science department teams, analyzing data, designing curriculum and creating lesson plans. CARE Team Meeting will develop intervention tracking system and use a case Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) New Teachers (Less than 3 years experience) Rigorous Instruction September 2018 - June 2019 6th grade model teacher, new teachers, administration How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Advance data, Interim DRP/Khan Academy Assessments. All Teachers Rigorous Instruction July 2018-June 2019 Administrators Administrators, teachers, Borough and District Support Team meeting agendas/minutes. Math and science departments Rigorous Instruction September, 2018- June 2019 Math and science department leaders Coaching logs School Based Support Team (CARE Team) Rigorous Instruction September 2018-June 2019 CARE Team CARE team tracking system. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 54  management protocol to enhance speed of intervention implementation and to evaluate intervention effectiveness. Creation of an IEP focused grade team meeting one time per week in which grade teams examine two students IEPs per week. This meeting will be facilitated by a grade level special education liaison. The three special education liaisons will meet weekly to develop protocols and agendas for these meetings. Distributive Leadership Structure - Teacher leaders plan agendas, facilitate meetings, maintain digital records/minutes, and attend leadership meetings. Teacher leaders will meet weekly with the principal before school starts funded by per session. Grade Teams Rigorous Instruction September 2018-June 2019 Grade Teams, Grade Team Leaders DRP and Khan Academy growth for students with disabilities. Collaborative Teachers Department, grade team, CARE team teacher leaders September 2018 - June 2019 Grade Team leaders DRP and Khan Academy growth. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In August of 2018, various staff members reach out to any incoming students to schedule a home visit. These home visits are used to ensure a smooth transition into middle school. Throughout the schoolyear 18-19 , there are four parent teacher nights scheduled by the DOE. During the first teacher parent night, parents will be surveyed to determine their needs. Every Wednesday, time is set aside for staff members to reach out to parents and family members. During the month of April/May, their is a community event for all families that reside in the community. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP-RISE 55  Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. We will leverage resources from our Community Schools CBO partner, MSQI, District 14, the DSR, and Borough Instructional Specialists. We will also leverage coaching resources from the Teacher Leader office. We will use conceptual consolidation to maximize the impact of all funding streams. We will use flexible scheduling to maximize human resources of our staff. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. We will examine team meeting agendas and minutes in January 2019 to determine the regularity and effectiveness of our four teaming structures. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance data, team meeting agenda/minutes, CARE Team tracking system. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 56  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). (aligned with Rise Key 2) Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. (aligned with Rise Key 6) 2.3 x 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. (aligned with Rise Key 1) 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). (aligned with Rise Keys 4 and 5) Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? In 2017-2018, the principal received an MOLP rating of highly effective. The school leader received rating of Well Developed in 1.1, 1.3, 1.4, 3.1, 3.4, 5.1 and of proficient in 1.2, 2.2, 4.1, 4.2. In 2016-2017 School Quality Report, Effective School Leadership score 4.21 (.59 above the city average and .12 above the district average) 97% positive responses on NYS School Survey (87% city average). We are still awaiting the final School Quality Report for 2017-2018 Strengths from PPO: - realignment of units to CCLS - communication of mutual accountability, high expectations and trust - creating structures for regular teacher meetings Needs: 2018-19 CEP-RISE 57  - continue pushing for consistency of teaching practices across all contents and grade levels. - keep building on work to further teacher and student capacity to engage in rigorous instruction and tasks. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Effective School Leadership What is your vision for effective school leadership at your school? Significant changes have occurred in the the last two years around school leadership. The former principal of MS 50 retired, and the District 14 superintendent selected Ben Honoroff, a former Assistant Principal and instructional coach with the Middle School Quality Initiative to lead the school. Mr. Honoroff is a strong believer in distributive leadership and works with El Puente, MSQI, and Teaching Matters to identify teacher leaders in the various content areas. These leaders are trained to conduct meetings for their colleagues, and to serve as liaisons between administration, our outside partners, and their teacher teams. An instructional cabinet consisting of teacher leaders in each department as well as grade team leaders meets with school leadership weekly to plan respective team meeting agendas and report on respective team progress. The school also develops distributive leadership around school culture, selecting a school based support staff member to lead SIT meetings. This leader, along with El Puente’s Community School Director also attend instructional cabinet meetings. The partnership between El Puente and MS 50 continues to grow and is monitored through the daily interaction of parent and student growth/participation in the program. The instructional leaders and the Community School Coordinator, who is based at MS 50 meet and strategically plan for the entire school community, teachers, students and parents. The CBO continues to work as part of the CARE Team in order to assist in providing support with students’ academic, social and emotional needs. MS50 is supported by the El Puente Community School team, who co-facilitated the mental health readiness assessment, which helps to identify current mental health needs and gaps to be addressed. This will also inform our team how best to integrate the resources of our external partners, the Puerto Rican Family Institute and Woodhull Hospital, in providing support services to students and/or families. The El Puente Community School team supports Expanded Learning Time focus by leveraging the broad staffing and programming of the El Puente Beacon after school program, which is already in operation at MS50. The vision of the school leader, is a shared leadership model. In collaboration with key stakeholders, informed through a theory of action, current data and evidence collected through observations in line with the Danielson framework for teaching, school leadership identifies effective teaching practices and shares them with staff through professional development, inter-visitations and team planning. This goal will be achieved through the leader's strong expertise in curriculum development and the ability to make all curriculum accessible to SWD and ENL students. Ultimately, the principal has systems in place to self-assess, adjust and regulate all plans to incorporate the needs of students, staff and parents. The school leader established teacher team meeting time for planning and collaboration in order to ensure the continuous progress of all students. The instructional leaders will continue to conduct frequent cycles of observations in order to monitor pedagogical practice and student engagement. Teacher teams along with school leaders will progress monitor student growth utilizing two literacy assessment tools, Light Sail and DRP in addition to formative and summative assessments. The principal will conduct bi-weekly cabinet meetings and ensure that through distributive leadership each member articulates the goals for student achievement at a grade or content specific meeting. This collaboration will look like teams of staff coming together to analyze summative and formative data in order to drive educational decisions concerning all students. The leader organized student and teacher programs strategically in order to support the academic needs of all students. SETTS, ENL, AIS and Targeted Intervention is scheduled in order to address the needs of the most struggling students. Teachers will receive professional development from school specialists on incorporating strategies to meet the needs of 2018-19 CEP-RISE 58  all students. Expanded learning time will also be offered to all students in order to provide resources for both the struggling as well as high achieving student. Fiscal capital has been allocated, but the concern is the amount will not sustain the programs throughout 2017-2018. The school leader will conduct observations through both formal and informal menus. The school leaders has established a calendar of observations, feedback, and follow-up on recommendations. Inter-visitations, along with professional development sessions are implemented in order to assist with timely actionable, concrete, feedback. Accountability of student achievement is shared and expected of all stakeholders. Through this teamwork we will support one another and build trust by analyzing progress and discussing strategies to ensure growth in all aspects of our school community. All members of the community are accountable to one another, with the principal as the gate-keeper to all members of the community. The instructional leader effectively communicates with the school community, to ensure that all students are growing academically as well as socially, and emotionally. Systems developed in order to support the needs of the community are done through the CARE Team, El Puente, Parent Outreach through the Parent Coordinator, and Parent Association and School Leadership team. Other means of outreach will be the new system designed by the Department of Education entitled “NYC School Account”, newsletters and school website. The community school director will assist in recruiting students, parent outreach, providing translated services, and outreach to the community at large. Administrators and school leadership will work closely with Teaching Matters coaches, Middle School Quality Initiative (MSQI) literacy coach, to design high quality ELA and disciplinary literacy PDs. School leaders will engage in frequent cycles of observation to ensure effective feedback. Teachers’ professional learning needs will be met through weekly math PD, Teaching Matters and MSQI coaching, administrative support, and peer mentoring with additional learning opportunities provided by conferences, observation feedback, inter-visitations and departmental meetings. ELA teachers will receive 4 observations per cycle/year. The school will integrate internal PDs with external MSQI PDs to provide opportunities for teachers to engage in intensive, full-day trainings and to ensure coherence of literacy strategies and pedagogy. What are your core belief(s) for school improvement and how they inform your vision for developing instructional leadership at your school? Based on classroom observation data, QR feedback and PPO recommendations, I plan on focusing on building consistency in rigorous, engaging instruction across content and grade levels. This will entail a thorough PD plan, increased regularity/consistency of instructional cabinet team meetings, targeted coaching support, and focused monitoring beyond Advance observations. I also plan to focus on supporting/monitoring SBST Team through coordinated work with SBST supervisor and more focused monitoring of CARE Team intervention follow through and tracking. What is your vision for developing differentiated leadership throughout your school? How will you utilize teacher leaders to build broad capacity within your school? As described in the collaborative teachers section, each teacher team (departmental, grade, SBST) is formed using distributive leadership and is facilitated by a teacher leader. An instructional lead team is made up of each of the teacher leaders. This instructional lead team meets weekly with school leadership to align team meetings around coherent strategies for improving student outcomes both academic and social emotional. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 59  How will the leader foster collaborative school governance processes, and ensure full family participation together with other stakeholders? In 2016-2017 we developed a student government that meets during our ELT. In 2018-2019, we will expand this initiative and hold regular town hall meetings facilitated by student government members. Student government will meet monthly with the principal to provide feedback on school policy and to collaborate on building positive school culture. These meetings will continue for the school year 2018-2019. To deepen family participation we will build on two initiatives implemented last year Parent Teacher Home Visit Project (PTHVP). PTHVP will build trust with families, changing the turf of initial parent meetings from the school to the home. How will you use evidence-based systems to ensure school and teacher leaders are led by a cycle of continuous learning and use this to inform their teams’ priorities? Evidence-Based System Support(s) Collaborator(s) Khan Academy, DRP, State Item Analysis, Interim assessments, IEPs, Advance Data MSQI Dashboard, State test scores, SESIS, Advance MSQI Coach, Teaching Matters coaches. , Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By June 2019, in partnership with the community organization, El Puente, school leadership will build upon the current schools mission and vision utilizing various strategies in order to meet the social and academic needs of the students as measured by an increase of 2% projected student enrollment. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal? Student Attendance Supportive Environment 2018-19 CEP-RISE 60  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Creation of an in-house system to evaluate school initiatives. Leadership Team (Lead Teachers and Administration Enrollment Teachers Enrollment Administrators, Teachers Administrators, Teachers September, 2018 -June, 2019 September, 2018-June, 2019 How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Increase in MOTP data and student performance on state exams. Increase in MOTP data and student performance on state exams. Increase in MOTP data and student performance on state exams. Increase in MOTP data and student performance on state exams. In addition to contractual observations, non-evaluative learning walks and inter-classroom visitations will be conducted for all teachers. Teachers will engage in self-reflection activities and identify ideas, techniques and strategies that they will be able to use in their practice. Teachers will also receive support and professional development through the district as well as borough instructional specialists and educational consultants. The school leader through the SLT will monitor operations and allocation of resources to ensure that they are Teachers Enrollment September, 2018-June, 2019 Administrators, borough support specialists, educational consultants Enrollment School Community, El Puente July 2018-June, 2019 Administrators, director of CBO 2018-19 CEP-RISE 61 All 8th graders Rigorous Instruction October and Principal November 2018 ELA/Math Growth Principal October 2018- May 2019 Students from across grade levels and subgroups. Families in PTA. Increase in 8th graders being accepted to one of their top 3 high schools. Increase in culture of literacy and time on text for participants. effectively supporting the school in meeting the needs of all students Lunch with principal program. Principal will have lunch with every 8th grader in groups of 5-6 to discuss high school application process and individual student high school preferences. Principal's book club. Principal will lead a book club 2-3 times through the year. Books will be purchased in English and Spanish and given to 15 students and 10 parents. Students will read a book and discuss the book over lunch with the principal. Principal will lead a book club discussion with parents/staff on the same text. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Engaging parents and families in school events is an important role of a school leader. Through monthly School Leadership Team meetings, the principal along with the School Leadership Chairperson plans activities to engage the parents in making school decisions. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. We will leverage instructional coaches and resources from MSQI, District 14, the DSR, and Borough Instructional Specialists. We will also leverage coaching resources from the Teacher Leader office. We will use conceptual consolidation to maximize the impact of all funding streams. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 62  X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By March 2019, the projected enrollment for 2018-2019 will have increased by 2% over the 2017/2018 enrollment. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. SEMS data analysis. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 63  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their x SOP(s) Addressed high expectations for student academic achievement. (aligned with Rise Key 2) 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. (aligned with Rise Key 4 and 6) 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. (aligned with Rise Key 5) 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. (aligned with Rise Key 3) Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? In our 2016-2017 school quality review, we received a score of 4.07 (.80 above city average and .40 above district average). In the school environment survey, 93% of families responded positively to questions about strong family-community ties compared to 88% in the City and 89% in the district. This was up from 78% in the 2014-2015. We are still awaiting final 2017-2018 survey data. ● The school communicates with families on an on-going basis, including an events calendar, honor roll assemblies, parent -teacher meetings, Back to School night, and a parent-teacher communication session held every Tuesday to prepare and respond to phone calls and letters. However, much of the information that is provided to parents is general in nature and not focused on expressing high expectations for all students. A weekly newsletter sent to parents is downloaded from the Resources for Educators website; however, it deals with generic topics for middle school and is not school specific. During interviews with the review team, several parents indicated that they felt that while they received information about their children’s grade levels, attendance, and behavior, they were not well equipped to support their children academically. Interviews with parents, students, and staff indicated that although progress reports are distributed, and the school leader has programmed teacher availability for phone conferences or individual meetings every Tuesday from 2:00 p.m. to 2:30 p.m., most information is about grades, attendance, and behavior, and does not address specific student strengths and weaknesses or guidance on how parents can support their children’s learning. ● The school provides limited opportunities for reciprocal communication with families. Teachers use Engrade to post student grades and assignments and communicate through text messaging, emails, and phone calls. Parents report that the school has not provided training on how to access and use the Engrade program, and not all families have access to 2018-19 CEP-RISE 64  a computer. All written communications and phone calls are translated into Spanish. Parents indicated they can visit the school at any time, and the parent coordinator is bilingual; however, meetings and parent workshops are sparsely attended. For example, only three parents attended a workshop on communication and student discipline. Parents interviewed reported that they have limited understanding of the CCLS or the demands of the curriculum. Additionally, although all grade eight students receive high school articulation material from the guidance counselor, according to interviews with parents, students, and student support staff, there are no workshops to assist families with the application process. ● A parent-teacher home visit program was instituted over the summer, in which trained teachers visited approximately one-half of the homes of incoming grade six students in order to establish a home-school relationship. However, there has been no follow up to these visits, and there is little evidence of training for parents and staff to enable them to subsequently work together to support student achievement. The student support staff reports the school does not offer PD to teachers or parents that encourages home-school partnerships to support student achievement. ● The school shares some data with parents that are related to grades, attendance, behavior, and events. According to interviews with staff and school leaders, little data is analyzed and specific student academic information is shared inconsistently. As a result, little comprehensive data is available when teachers phone parents on Tuesday afternoons or send emails or texts. Therefore, the ability of families to advocate for appropriate services for their children is limited. Nevertheless, during interviews with parents, some participants reported positive relationships with the school leaders and a welcoming environment where they can call school leaders directly or come to school without an appointment. Additional Findings by the IIT are: ● The school communicates with families on an on-going basis, including an events calendar, honor roll assemblies, parent -teacher meetings, Back to School night, and a parent-teacher communication session held every Tuesday to prepare and respond to phone calls and letters. However, much of the information that is provided to parents is general in nature and not focused on expressing high expectations for all students. A weekly newsletter sent to parents is downloaded from the Resources for Educators website; however, it deals with generic topics for middle school and is not school specific. During interviews with the review team, several parents indicated that they felt that while they received information about their children’s grade levels, attendance, and behavior, they were not well equipped to support their children academically. Interviews with parents, students, and staff indicated that although progress reports are distributed, and the school leader has programmed teacher availability for phone conferences or individual meetings every Tuesday from 2:00 p.m. to 2:30 p.m., most information is about grades, attendance, and behavior, and does not address specific student strengths and weaknesses or guidance on how parents can support their children’s learning. ● The school provides limited opportunities for reciprocal communication with families. Teachers use Engrade to post student grades and assignments and communicate through text messaging, emails, and phone calls. Parents report that the school has not provided training on how to access and use the Engrade program, and not all families have access to a computer. All written communications and phone calls are translated into Spanish. Parents indicated they can visit the school at any time, and the parent coordinator is bilingual; however, meetings and parent workshops are sparsely attended. For example, only three parents attended a workshop on communication and student discipline. Parents interviewed reported that they have limited understanding of the CCLS or the demands of the curriculum. Additionally, although all grade eight students receive high school articulation material from the guidance counselor, according to interviews with parents, students, and student support staff, there are no workshops to assist families with the application process.  A parent-teacher home visit program was instituted over the summer, in which trained teachers visited approximately one-half of the homes of incoming grade six students in order to establish a home-school relationship. However, there has been no follow up to these visits, and there is little evidence of training for parents and staff to enable them to subsequently work together to support student achievement. The student 2018-19 CEP-RISE 65  support staff reports the school does not offer PD to teachers or parents that encourages home-school partnerships to support student achievement. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Strong Family and Community Ties What is your vision for strong family and community ties at your school? What opportunities exist for the school staff to know the students and their families in order to better communicate and partner with families and communities in the vision for the school? School leaders and staff will consistently and frequently (6 times per year) communicate high expectations that are connected to a path to college and career readiness to families. Each student will have an advisor who will be the main point of contact with families. Advisors will prepare students twice a year for student-led conferences. Advisors will work with students to establish goals, examine portfolios of their own work, and analyze strengths and challenges. During student-led conferences, families will sit with their student and the student’s advisor and the student will present goals, strengths, and growth areas across content areas. In collaboration with El Puente, we will develop a system where all families receive school communications and can communicate with teachers and other staff members in both Spanish and English. This will include a more engaging, user-friendly school website and e-newsletter, coupled with the day-to-day support and communication (phone, email, in-person) to be offered by the on-site Community School Parent Advocate. The means by which we will assess this objective is increased family participation at parent-teacher meetings, increased participation on PTA, increased PTHVP visits, and increased enrollment. El Puente will additionally facilitate family engagement activities that will support MS50 staff in creating authentic relationships with their students’ families as decision-making partners, through educational/vocational workshops, family support services, & culturally/linguistically relevant enrichment programming. We recognize the value of having families engage in decision-making and advocacy for their students around ELT programming. We will hold monthly meetings with families through the PTA and the SLT. Additionally we will engage families one morning every week, on parent engagement mornings, through ongoing texting and emailing in support of two-way communications. Additionally we will engage families via PTHVP, and student led conferences. El Puente will also be facilitating regular newsletters/print newsletters, as well as the new website and social media outlets to ensure we exercise every avenue of reaching parents, families, and community partners. We will use these communication venues to ensure 100% participation in ELT and build student/family choice into ELT programming. The means by which we will assess this objective are ELT attendance, PTA and SLT attendance and PTHVP visits. In partnership with El Puente, MS 50 will develop a system where all families receive school communications and can communicate with teachers and other staff members in both Spanish and English. This will include a more engaging, user-friendly school website and e-newsletter, coupled with the day-to-day support and communication (phone, email, in-person) to be offered by the on-site Community School Parent Advocate. El Puente will additionally facilitate family engagement activities that will support MS50 staff in creating authentic relationships with their students’ families as decision-making partners, through educational/vocational workshops, family support services, & culturally/linguistically relevant enrichment programming. In addition, El Puente supports the development of MS50’s relationship with parents and students by facilitating their services as seamless continuation of our school day. They provide enrichment activities to MS50 students, including after-school wraparound services (6 days/week), a summer program to support to support students’ academic success, arts enrichment, civic engagement, as well as physical and social/emotional health and well-being. Parent engagement has also been bolstered by El Puente’s provision of support services for parents and families, to include Spanish GED and ESL classes, health workshops, immigration referral services, and health care access case management. As described above, the school’s partnership with El Puente will expand to further support family and community ties, especially with regards to the provision of direct services to parents through El Puente’s FAMILIA (Free Advocacy and Mediation for Immigration and Low Income Access) Program. This will provide families access to support in areas to 2018-19 CEP-RISE 66  include: immigration, legal referrals, employment counseling/training, ESL/GED classes, Medicaid/managed care workshops, housing referrals, and translation/interpretation assistance. El Puente will leverage its 33 years of building deep connections to the many community institutions that support MS50 families: churches, day care centers, cultural institutions, civic groups, commercial establishments, local government (Community Board 1), elected officials, and more. Within the Community School model, how will families be welcomed into the school and made a part of the school community? What support will administrators, teachers, school staff and school safety officers be given to help create a welcoming environment? Will there be a dedicated space for families in the school? Creation of a parent room that will provide families with parent resources and a work station to plan PTA and SLT events. The El Puente Community Schools team will host Cafecito Corner where families, community members and MS 50 staff are invited to socialize over coffee, tea and snacks. This time is set for parents to socialize and learn more about school opportunities, and to express any questions or concerns. In addition to this dedicated time and space the SLT is a time and place where the school community, CBO and parents meet to discuss how this entire community can best support MS 50. We also welcome families to meet with teachers by appointment at any time, if the Cafecito Corner does not fit their schedule. How will the school identify and develop families to take leadership roles in school decision making/school governance structures? We recognize the value of having families engage in decision-making and advocacy for their students around ELT programming. We will hold monthly meetings with families through the PTA and the SLT. Additionally we will engage families one morning every week, on parent engagement mornings, through ongoing texting and emailing in support of two-way communications. Additionally we will engage families via PTHVP, and student led conferences. El Puente will also be facilitating regular newsletters/print newsletters, as well as the new website and social media outlets to ensure we exercise every avenue of reaching parents, families, and community partners. We will use these communication venues to ensure 100% participation in ELT and build student/family choice into ELT programming. The means by which we will assess this objective are ELT attendance, PTA and SLT attendance and PTHVP visits. How will the school engage the community and families? How will they ensure that teachers are able to learn from families about the children being taught? In partnership with El Puente, MS 50 will develop a system where all families receive school communications and can communicate with teachers and other staff members in both Spanish and English. This will include a more engaging, user-friendly school website and e-newsletter, coupled with the day-to-day support and communication (phone, email, in-person) to be offered by the on-site Community School Parent Advocate. El Puente will additionally facilitate family engagement activities that will support MS50 staff in creating authentic relationships with their students’ families as decision-making partners, through educational/vocational workshops, family support services, & culturally/linguistically relevant enrichment programming. In addition, El Puente supports the development of MS50’s relationship with parents and students by facilitating their services as seamless continuation of our school day. They provide enrichment activities to MS50 students, including after-school wraparound services (6 days/week), a summer program to support to support students’ academic success, arts enrichment, civic engagement, as well as physical and social/emotional health and well-being. Parent engagement has also been bolstered by El Puente’s provision of support services for parents and families, to include Spanish GED and ESL classes, health workshops, immigration referral services, and health care access case management. How do families partner with the school and CBO to support student success? Will there be dedicated space for families? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 67 Family partnerships with school: PTHVP, CafecitoCorner Family partnerships with CBO: PTHVP,CafecitoCorner Is there dedicated space for these partnerships? Yes What data and student progress feedback loops will be present at the school to ensure that families knowledgeable of their children’s scholastic success, in addition to report cards? Skedula, PTHVP, parent attendance at events (PTA, SLT, PTHVP, Conferences) Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By June 2019, the school community including the PTA executive board, parent coordinator, CBO director and school leaders will work to foster a partnership with parents through increased outreach and supports as demonstrated by a 5% participation increase at all parent events. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal? Student Attendance Performance Index on State Math Exam n/a n/a 2018-19 CEP-RISE 68 How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Increase in family attendance at parent conferences Increase in student attendance and increase in parent participation at school events. Part 4 – Action Plan Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All families Parent Engagement November 2018 - March 2019 Administration, Lead Teachers, Grade Teams Parent Engagement July, 2018-June, 2019 Administrators, Teachers, Guidance Counselor, El Puente CBO 6 th Grade Families and new students in grades 7 and 8. Student Led Conferences - As part of the D14 initiative, we will continue to hold November and March student led conferences. . Parent/Teacher Home Visit Program: MS 50 was selected to be one of 10 middle schools from NYC to participate in this NYCDOE pilot program .A trained team of MS 50 faculty and staff along with El Puente CBO staff members will continue to make home visits to the families of all incoming 6 th graders and new students in grades 7 and 8. We will add to this a second PTHVP visit to all rising 8th graders to discuss the high school applcation process. Our goal is to continue forging relationships with the incoming families and to welcome them to the MS 50 school community. The ultimate goal is to establish a warm and collaborative partnership with our families. We will also visit all rising 8th graders to discuss the high school application 2018-19 CEP-RISE 69  process. Our goal is to welcome incoming families into the MS 50 community and to build trust by shifting the turf of parent engagement. Through these visits, we will assess the general needs of incoming 6th graders and their families, such that we can design our instructional program and activities to address these needs, once school starts. The second rising 8th grader visits are designed to support families through the complexities of the high school application process beginning before the 8th grade. Parent Surveys: Our parent coordinator will continue our practice of soliciting as many parents as possible to participate in our internal Parent Needs’ Survey, to gather information about their needs and challenges. These surveys are distributed throughout the year at our parent orientation sessions, parent‐teacher conferences, and one‐on‐one parent interactions We work with El Puente to offer existing adult programming to specifically target MS 50 families and students, including: ESL and Spanish‐GED classes; staffing adult computer classes; community social/recreational classes (sewing circles, skill‐based workshops, etc.) All Families and Students Parent Engagement July, 2018-June, 2019 Parent Coordinator All Families and Students Parent Engagement July, 2018-June, 2019 El Puente, CBO, School Community Increase in student attendance and increase in parent participation at school events. Increase in student attendance and increase in parent participation at school events. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 70 All families and students Family/Community Engagement September 2018 El Puente CBO, School Community Increased enrollment. 50 Fest - PTA and school staff organize a community event to celebrate MS 50 accomplishments, including interactive stations for families and community members to experience MS 50 initiatives/activities. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. We will leverage resources from our Community Schools CBO partner, MSQI, District 14, the DSR, and Borough Instructional Specialists. We will also leverage coaching resources from the Teacher Leader office. We will use conceptual consolidation to maximize the impact of all funding streams. We will use flexible scheduling to maximize human resources of our staff. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. The School Leadership Team in collaboration with El Puente’s Advisory Team will monitor monthly strategies developed to increase strong family-community ties. By January 2019 participation will increase 5% at Parent Teacher Association meetings and SLT meetings. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. PTA/ attendance records Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 71  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environments, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Goals for ELT should aligned to the Rise Benchmarks. How will the school will ensure that all students’ individual needs are served during the Rise ELT and how the school’s vision for ELT will impact both academic achievement and social emotional growth? Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all students will demonstrate a growth of 2% as indicated through performance measures on both the NYS ELA and Math test Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? Voluntary X Compulsory Rise ELT – Describe what accountability structures the school will employ to ensure participation of all students, including special populations, will participate fully in Rise ELT. Additional ELT - If there is a voluntary ELT program in addition to the compulsory Rise ELT, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. All students are programmed for ELT from the first day of school. It is understood by students, families and faculty that ELT is a part of the regular school day. In a recent internal study of our strategies utilized to drastically decrease our chronically absent students (40% to 24%) we convened a circle of former chronically absent students and asked them strategies helped them improve their attendance. ELT, because it is based on teacher passion and student choice, was at the top of the list. Part 3 – ELT Program Description Target Population: The ELT program for a Rise School will be offered to all students in the school. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program: How will the school integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging? How will CBO staff and the school’s teachers be integrated to provide a seamless learning day?  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduces risk for retention or drop out, and increases the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  What new content areas and opportunities will be offered to students? How will the school ensure all IEP and language mandates are met during ELT? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 72   Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  How will community educators receive professional development? Are there plans to provide joint PD to school faculty and community partner staff?  What content will be led by pedagogical staff and what content will be led by CBO partners?  How will the school best utilize CBO partners to impact student achievement?  How will effective outreach be conducted to families?  How will programming be made easily accessible to students and families in order to encourage participation? Beginning September 2015, student programs were extended to reflect a student schedule of 8:40 - 4:00. ELT will be built into the student program with an additional 60 minutes period being added to the end of the student day. In addition, every student will be expected to spend an additional 50 minutes per week above and beyond ELT by participating in clubs, athletics, advanced academic courses, or academic intervention services. Enrichment activities will include debate, spoken word, robotics, chess, gardening, community mural painting, video game design, crocheting, band, dance, cartooning, painting, athletics. ELT will provide academic advancement classes, allowing students the opportunity to take Algebra and Living Environment Regents classes and to prepare fo the Spanish proficiency exam. The means by which we will assess this objective are daily attendance rate, chronic absenteeism rate, student scholarship data, and state test performance. We believe that student learning takes place both inside and outside of the traditional classroom, and that when students interact with teachers in different settings it builds trust. By engaging all students in advisory and a wide array of ELT classes, matching teachers to enrichment classes for which they have skill and passion, and culminating the initiative with an ELT celebration/demonstration day, we hope to build trust between students and teachers, students and other students, families and school staff, and school staff and school leadership. We further hope to build trust with students and parents by empowering them to have a say in the design and evaluation of ELT activities. Students will be able to contribute through the new Student Council and afterschool Youth Advisory Board. Parents will also be able to contribute through their engagement on the PTA and School Leadership Team. The means by which we will assess this objective is by responses to our community needs assessment surveys, as well as the percentage of positive answers on trust related questions in NYCDOE school survey. El Puente will support rigorous enrichment by leveraging staff and community partnerships to co-facilitate ELT activities, as well as continue many of these activities in the afterschool program it operates in the MS50 building, which runs to 9pm. El Puente also provides arts and recreational enrichment activities on Saturdays, during school holidays, and over the summer. The unique learning styles of the various students at MS 50 are being addressed in a creative way. Since 28 % of the students are ENl’s many of the opportunities to enrich and scaffold instruction need to include strategies that address the needs of the ENL student. Through the Integrated Arts Program and the MSQI Debate students will use these vehicles of expression as a system to learn. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 73  Teachers engage in ELT meetings for PD and to identify unique learning needs of students. Community school staff makes regular parental outreach. Teachers will create student-friendly descriptions for all ELT courses that will go into an ELT course catalog that will be used to help students make informed decisoins about ELT courses and help students identify their passions. In 2018-2019, we made a slight change to our ELT program, offering it Tuesday - Friday for 70 minutes instead of every day for 60 minutes. We made this change to give teachers PD time once a week and to provide longer ELT sessions to better failitate project-based and performance-based instruction. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. How will the school assess the impact of ELT on individual student achievement and social emotional development? 2. 3. School administration, including Guidance Counselors, advisors, the SIT team and El Puente school-based and after-school program staff will be responsible for ensuring that 100% of MS 50 students are programmed for and regularly attending ELT. The success and impact of ELT programs will be monitored by reviewing overall student scholarship and attendance at the end of each marking period. First marking period will constitute the first major benchmark of success and predictor of student achievement and attendance. Attendance and scholarship data will be generated and analyzed to determine whether we are reaching our goal.The ELT program will be implemented through the joint partnership between El Puente and MS50 and both will oversee the program. The success will be monitored through the community partners, an outside agency who will evaluate and ensure guidelines are being met and the members of MS50’s school leadership team which includes administrator, teachers and parents. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. The ETL will begin September 2018 through June 2019. The extended learning will take place Monday through Friday from 3PM until 4PM. Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. We will leverage resources from our Community Schools CBO partner, MSQI, District 14, the DSR, and Borough Instructional Specialists. We will also leverage coaching resources from the Teacher Leader office. We will use 2018-19 CEP-RISE 74  conceptual consolidation to maximize the impact of all funding streams. We will use flexible scheduling to maximize human resources of our staff. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. 21st Century Title I 1003(a) X X Tax Levy X Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA SIG Grant P/F Set-aside C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In January 2019, students will receive a benchmark DRP assessment which should indicate student growth of 2 percentage points. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. DRP midyear benchmark. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 75  Section 7: Community School Description Directions: The Community School strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – The Community School Program Goal(s) How is the Community School strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? El Puente will serve all MS50 students through the utilization of the community school strategy to create universal supports and enrichment activities, and will provide targeted/intensive services to students (and their families) who fall in one or more of the following categories: · Are chronically absent from school · Are chronically late to school · Are frequently cited for behavioral infractions and/or suspensions · Are new immigrants/English Language Learners (ELLs) who need cultural, as well as academic transition supports Attendance improvement activities will be based on qualitative/quantitative data and approaches rooted in community & family connectedness (ex. 1-on-1 students and/or family mentoring, home visits, parent conferences, incentive programs). Family Engagement activities will support MS50 staff in creating authentic relationships with their students’ families as decision-making partners, through educational/vocational workshops, family support services, & culturally/linguistically relevant enrichment programming. We will also have leadership development sessions to prepare parents to take on leadership roles through the PTA and School Leadership Team, as well as workshops for parents, to include: fitness, nutrition & wellness, ESL/GED and job training/skill building. Academic Support activities include the implementation of El Puente’s Integrated Arts Project model, a dynamic, in-depth learning process that brings teachers and teaching artists together in collaborative partnership to create integrated academic experiences around a central theme, vision, or community issue to motivate academic engagement and achievement. This model has been tailored in the past few years to support MS50’s English Language Learners and students with special needs. The Community School strategy is embedded in all facets of school programming and structures. In grade team meetings, staff utilizes the “kid-talk” protocol that focuses on identifying a student’s strengths and areas to work on. In addition, staff analyzes the development of the student- academically, socially and emotionally and makes referrals to other school-based teams or the Community School partner, El Puente. We have found that when we address any barriers to learning that they end up doing better in their classwork, homework and assessments. Our DRP scores that test reading comprehension show that we outperformed the national average as well as other MSQI schools for all grades. The math state test data showed that we also performed close to the city average. Every year, our academic 2018-19 CEP-RISE 76  achievement continues to show gains and the portion of this RCEP that address curriculum and instruction shows the strategy and supports that will be put in place next year to continue this growth. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be an increase the school’s average daily attendance by 2% through targeted student and family support services that will include monitoring attendance through the New Visions data tool. By June 2019, there will be an increase in positive responses in the student school survey through targeted events focused on culture, identity and diversity, new advisory curriculum and professional development cycle- "Turning Pain into Propane", where teachers learn about biases, identity, culturally responsive environment, language of empowerment and get trained by The People's Institute for Survival and Beyond. By June 2019, we will expand partnerships to 10 local high school, colleges, community-based organizations and senior centers in order to expand high school and college access. Please answer the following question as it relates to meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? We want our students to continue to be critical, creative and thoughtful thinkers that achieve high levels of success inside and outside the classroom. Our Community School strategy of increasing student and family voice in the decision-making processes of the school in areas such as ELT, Attendance, Family Engagement, College & Career Readiness, Health & Wellness, Social Emotional Learning and Integrated Arts Project have wielded communities that deeply care about what happens to every single student. Students and families feel supported and valued and that has led to an increase in attendance and engagement. Our community identifies the connections between each of these areas and understands that the combination of strategies and supports have led to the academic success of many of our students. For our students to be critical, creative and thoughtful thinkers, they need to be given the space and the supports to rise to their potential. Our Community School goals allow for this to occur. Part 2 – Community School Program Description Part 2a. Identify the CBO partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service El Puente All -Coordinators for each of the following programs: Extended Learning Time, College and Career Readiness, Attendance, Integrated Arts Project, Social Emotional Learning, Mental Health, Parent Engagement 2018-19 CEP-RISE 77  -Beacon After-School Program -Teaching artists in the fields of visual arts, theatre, music and dance. -Tutors -Community Partnerships El Puente’s ongoing and developing programs at MS50 include: · Our year-round Beacon Leadership Center at MS50, which has been operating since 1999. We offer MS50 students and siblings’ free, comprehensive afterschool and summer programs, with a major focus on pre-professional arts training and leadership development. · MS50 Teacher/Staff professional development through El Puente’s Global Justice Institute, to include integrated curriculum development, project-based learning, collaborative teaching, and Participatory Action Research models of assessment · Parent-Teacher Home Visit program, a national model to build connections between parents, families, and teachers. MS50-El Puente was one of only 10 school partnerships in NYC to pilot this program, and was one of the most successful. · Social service supports/referrals for parents/families through El Puente’s FAMILIA (Free Advocacy and Mediation for Immigration and Low Income Access) Program. This will provide families access to support in areas to include: immigration, legal referrals, employment counseling/training, ESL/GED classes, Medicaid/managed care workshops, housing referrals, and translation/interpretation assistance. n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 2018-19 CEP-RISE 78 n/a n/a n/a Part 2b. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. The MS50-El Puente Community School team (MS50 Principal & other administrators, CS Director & key CS Team members) will meet weekly as a whole group or in cohorts relevant to priorities/activities for that week. CS Director & El Puente CS Team members will take responsibility of sharing data and other information generated by the Community Schools Initiative (ex. Parent engagement, coordination of in-school or after-school services, etc.), while the MS50 Principal and school Admin share school-based data relevant to agenda (ex. attendance, test scores, etc.). CSD will work closely with Parent-Teacher Association to engage parents monthly in topics that pertain to the development and sustainability of the Community School. El Puente’s Global Justice Institute will be available to provide additional training sessions in key areas relevant to the RISE and Community Schools Initiatives, to include assessment, team building, and resource development. Part 3 – Community School Partnerships Oversight 2018-19 CEP-RISE 79  Part 3a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 1. The Community School Director will lead CBO-partnership activities for both the Community School and RISE School Initiatives. The Community School Director will be supported by El Puente’s Curriculum and Assessment Coordinator and other Global Justice Institute team members in continuing to facilitate the United Way NYC/NYC DOE-designed Needs & Assets Assessment model, and will integrate Participatory Action Research methods of assessment & reflection. These multilevel assessments will help maximize all resources by identifying key desired services and programming, and will inform our provision of services and programming at the school. The El Puente Community School team will support Extended Learning Time focus by leveraging the broad staffing and programming of the El Puente Beacon afterschool program, which is already in operation at MS50. Key to ELT will be El Puente’s Academic Acceleration model, in which we create Holistic Individualized Plans (HIP) for students with: targeted tutoring, intensive test prep (ELA/Math/Sci). HIPs are teacher ‘support roadmaps,’ but are also students’ personal action plans to engage in self-assessment, journal writing, & peer support to build self-esteem & discipline on challenge areas. We also use preventative interventions such as transition workshops (including high school choice, pre-college prep, and Specialized High School Admissions Test (SHSAT) prep) and parent-teacher home visits. 2. El Puente’s Community School (CS) team (comprised of Community School Director, Principal, Parent Engagement & Leadership Coordinator, Beacon After-school Program Director & Coordinators, MS 50 teachers, students and parents) meet monthly in an atmosphere of partnership and shared decision-making through the School Leadership Team structure. Items that are discussed in the SLT will be placed on the agenda for the PTA Community School committee and Student Government. The Parent Engagement & Leadership Coordinator facilitates the discussion with the parent committee and the Community School Director facilitates the meeting with the Student Government. We have found that by funneling these items through our various structures that we are able to utilize that information at the School Leadership Team meeting to make decisions. 3. A team of social workers, mentors, District-wide attendance teacher, attendance coordinator, CSD and Assistant Principal meet weekly to review student and school-based attendance data. Interventions are logged for each student including items that were identified in other teams (i.e. grade level, CARE, department meetings) and team identifies additional interventions for students. The attendance coordinator works closely with the New Visions data specialist to identify trends and sort/narrow data (i.e. absences in the last 5 days, absent on particular dates, success rate of mentor). Part 3b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 80  The key elements necessary to implement the Community School strategy include: · Human resources: staff representation in PTA, Community School Team, SLT; teacher representation in curriculum meetings (including Integrated Arts Project planning and implementation); workshop facilitators · Instructional Resources: sharing of in-school curricula so enrichment activities can be aligned with school day · Space: classrooms or alternate spaces are needed for Community School staff, adult programs & health/mental health wellness services Part 3c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. EL Puente has been in partnership with MS for close to 20 years. Start date will be July 1, 2018 and end on June 30,2019. Part 3d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this R-CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 81  Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Level 1 students; Holdovers, Overage students. Scores below 45 on DRP. Secondary diagnostics that indicate phonemic awareness struggles. Level 1 students; Holdovers, Overage student. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Dedicated AIS Teacher; RIT period, Wilson/Just Words where appropriate, Teacher’s College Writing Workshop, WELT Computer based program, IXL, to support the instructional program Bilingual students have an after-school program. 20% of our students are at levels 3 or 4 as indicated by the NYS Science 4 th grade exam. NY Sun Works and the STEM lab to support our science curriculum for selected students Social Studies AIS is embedded in ELA via content-based texts MYON whole class and small group instruction At risk, SWD/IEP students CARE TEAM Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Whole class, flexible groups and small group small group The school day including ELT. Whole class, flexible groups and small group small group The school day, selected periods. Whole class, flexible groups and small group small group During the school day including ELT. Whole class and small group instruction Small group, one-to-one School day including ELT School Day including ELT Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) 2018-19 CEP-RISE 82  Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 30 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We provide backpacks full of supplies and uniforms for all STH students. During the day we provide counseling, if needed, for the child, and social and emotional support for child as well as the family. We also do home visits to all students, including students in temporary housing, and our CBO has offered support to families attending housing court. We also have referral services for the family regarding ESL classes , employment, and other services provided by the CBO. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 83  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP-RISE 84  Section 10: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Administration attends job fairs sponsored by the Department of Education in order to recruit qualified teachers. When hiring new teachers, teachers are interviewed by administration and are required to conduct a demonstration lessons. Teachers will be given continual professional development on the Danielson Framework for Teaching, and also in creating effective CCLS-aligned lesson plans. The school leadership will continue to support new teachers through a supportive environment of trust. New teachers are provided with veteran mentors and we engage in an intensive coaching model (modeling, co-teaching, observation with feedback) from master teachers from Teaching Matters for math and science and from MSQI for literacy. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). We will partner with MSQI and Teaching Matters to provide job-embedded coaching and PD. We will work with our Community Schools CBO partner, El Puente to provide professional development around advisory, adapted from El Puente's Global Justice Institute. We will partner with El Puente to implement and expand our Integrated Arts Project (IAP). El Puente will provide high quality professional development for teachers and partner teaching artists. We will partner with NY Sun Works for PD around our hydroponics laboratory. We also continue to participate in the superintendent’s district collaborative PD and inter-school visitations. We will also create lab-sites using coaching from the Teacher Leader program and our three teacher leaders (Warren - model teacher, Mason- model teacher, Whitaker - Peer Collaborative teacher. in order to share best practices from off-site PD sessions offered through the Renewal Process in the areas of academic vocabulary, explicit instruction and the writing project. These teachers will provide professional development sessions for their colleagues at MS 50. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 2018-19 CEP-RISE 85  3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). NA 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers through the MOSL (measures of student learning) team have been working and will continue to work to determine the selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures. Departmental teams meet twice weekly and regularly examine periodic and formative assessments that help shape our assessment plan. These teachers have been provided with professional development in this area and will continue to be provided professional development in this area for the school year 2017-2018. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (R-CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X X Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B, 5C, 5E 5A Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Federal Federal 0 0 2018-19 CEP-RISE 86  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 0 0 0 0 0 X N/A X N/A X 5A, 5E 5A, 5E 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/R-CEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 87   Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 88  Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current R-CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 14K050 J.H.S. John D. Wells, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students MS50 will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 89  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 90  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact School-Parent Compact (SPC) 14K050 J.H.S. John D. Wells, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2018-19 CEP-RISE 91  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: 2018-19 CEP-RISE 92  ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 93  ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 94  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP-RISE 95  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: We offer both push-in and pull-out ENL instruction at MS 50. Our rationale is that students have different learning styles and that offering different formats of ENL services will more likely meet the needs of all learners. We offer push in services 5 periods a week in the ELA classes, and we offer pull out 2 hours per week during Expanded Learning Time. We also offer additional pull out services depending on student needs. During push in classes, the ENL teacher provides direct content area instruction uisng team teaching, parallel teaching and flexible grouping. At every grade level, a licensed ENL teacher co-plans and co-teaches ELA with a licensed ELA teacher and provides targeted instruction in language objectives to ENL students. Grade 6,7 and 8 ENL and FENL students are clustered in one mainstream class to facilitate push-in instruction. All entering ENL students also receive stand-alone ENL instruction 8 periods per week from a licensed ENL teacher. Our transitional bilingual program offers instruction 50% in English and 50% in Spanish, using a trans-language approach that views bilingualism as an asset. We will utilize NYSESLAT 2017 data to drive instructional strategies in ELA and TBL classes. We will use subgrouping and intentional grouping to target students at individual levels. We will also provide weekly advisory classes to address student social and emotional learning. We also provided targeted reading instruction at students level, including Wilson phonemic awareness classes to address the needs of struggling readers and SIFE students. Specific Targeted/High Needs Student Interventions for ELL students at MS 50 have been designed to continue and build upon our pilot Integrated Arts Project. In the 2016-20178 school year, this program was extremely successful in engaging targeted ENL students in the 6th grade and students in our TBE program in structured arts instruction (w/professional teaching artist) that was integrated into their ELA class. We received DOE grant to create a bomba curriculum and partner with BombaYo to engage students in the study of Afro-Puerto Rican culture through music,. The language acquisition skills , arts instruction, as well as the culminating presentation, were highly motivational for participating students’ level of engagement and attendance. Through the Community Schools Initiative, we will expand this program to work with our ELL students across the 6 th , 7 th , and 8 th grades. Additionally, we would also like to expand to other arts’ disciplines that would support both our cultural vision, and our STEAM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts, and Mathematics) initiatives, such as dance, music, or visual arts (studio arts, photography, and film/video). Our supplementary T3 program is offered through our Expanded Learning Time. We offer two classes to our ENL students that begin on September 8 and end on June 27. We offer an ENL through drama class (22 students), taught by our certified ENL teacher Tuesdays and Thursdays from 3:00 - 4:00 for a total of 50 sessions. We also offer a Spanish language math course taught by our certified bilingual math teacher (15 students) Monday, Wednesday and Friday also beginning September 8 and ending June 27 from 3:00 - 4:00 for a total of 90 sessions. We also have an intensive math tutoring program, designed to meet the needs of beginning ENL students that is taught by a licensed bilingual math teacher. For the upcoming 2017-2018 school year, we 2018-19 CEP-RISE 96  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information hired three special education teachers with bilingual extensions to build our capacity to meet the needs of ENL students with disabilities. ENL classes to beginner and intermediate ENL students as well as math instruction targeted to language standards, and taught by a bilingual math teacher. We also offer ENL Saturday school from 9:00 - noon starting January 7 through April 28. We anticipate having 30 students in the program. Students will be in four groups of 7-8 students rotating between four certified teachers (1 bilingual math, 2 NLA, one ENL). Students will switch classes every 1.5 hours rotating between ENL and math. The ratio of student to teacher in supplementary T3 program will be 15:1. Language of instruction will be 50% English 50% Spanish. We provide home language support via content glossaries, one to one dictionaries and Ipad translation programs. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: All content area teachers receive training in language acquisition strategies. All content area teachers will engage in an 8 week cycles of professional development on Monday mornings that promote effective and highly effective teaching qualities in the classroom. Our first 8-week cycle will be designed specifically around language acquisition strategies to provide multiple entry points for all students to complex text. Strategies will include word walls, sentence starters, role signs, discussion protocols, use of one-to-one dictionaries/glossaries. Each cycle concludes with a Learning Walk, conducted by the principal and teacher leaders to assess the effectiveness of the PD in enhancing instruction and teacher practice. PDs occur every Monday for 45 minutes. Agendas and attendance sheets are kept by the principal. PD is provided by principal (former MSQI literacy coach), MSQI Coach and ENL instructor. There is a total We will also provide PD to all teachers on new NYSELAT levels. We will implement SIOP model for differentiation instruction in content area classes. Our NLA teacher will provide instruction to all teachers in celebrating and utilizing home language in instruction. Teachers providing PD will receive ongoing PD by attending D14 and Brooklyn North ELL instructional workshops. PD will positively impact the progress of ELLs by training content area teachers on language acquisition strategies that can specifically help ELL students. This PD will not require cost. In the spring of 2017, we applied for and received a DOE dual language planning grant. Our dual language planning team will meet weekly to study effective dual language strategies, visit high achieving dual language middle school programs, and design our dual language program for 2018-2019. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 97  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: To deepen family participation we will build on two initiatives implemented last year Parent Teacher Homve Visit Project (PTHVP) and Academic Parent Teacher Teams (APTT). PTHVP will build trust with families, changing the turf of initial parent meetings from the school to the home. APTT rethinks the traditional parent conference model, asking parents to meet in teams during parent conferences to examine student work, student data and grade level standards to develop student goals and strategies to be implemented at home to support in-school learning. In partnership with El Puente, MS 50 will develop a system where all families receive school communications and can communicate with teachers and other staff members in both Spanish and English. This will include a more engaging, user-friendly school website and e-newsletter, coupled with the day-to-day support and communication (phone, email, in-person) to be offered by the on-site Community School Parent Advocate. El Puente will additionally facilitate family engagement activities that will support MS50 staff in creating authentic relationships with their students’ families as decision-making partners, through educational/vocational workshops, family support services, & culturally/linguistically relevant enrichment programming. In addition, El Puente supports the development of MS50’s relationship with parents and students by facilitating their services as seamless continuation of our school day. They provide enrichment activities to MS50 students, including after-school wraparound services (6 days/week), a summer program to support to support students’ academic success, arts enrichment, civic engagement, as well as physical and social/emotional health and well-being. Parent engagement has also been bolstered by El Puente’s provision of support services for parents and families, to include Spanish GED and ESL classes, health workshops, immigration referral services, and health care access case management. As described above, the school’s partnership with El Puente will expand to further support family and community ties, especially with regards to the provision of direct services to parents through El Puente’s FAMILIA (Free Advocacy and Mediation for Immigration and Low Income Access) Program. This will provide families access to support in areas to include: immigration, legal referrals, employment counseling/training, ESL/GED classes, Medicaid/managed care workshops, housing referrals, and translation/interpretation assistance. El Puente will leverage its 33 years of building deep connections to the many community institutions that support MS50 families: churches, day care centers, cultural institutions, civic groups, commercial establishments, local government (Community Board 1), elected officials, and more. Every Wednesday from 8:00 - 8:40 we the El Puente Community Schools team will host Cafecito Corner where families, community members and MS 50 staff are invited to socialize over coffee, tea and snacks. This time is set for parents to socialize and learn more about school opportunities, and to express any questions or concerns. In addition to this dedicated time and space the SLT is a time and place where the school community, CBO and parents meet to discuss how this entire community can best support MS 50. Records including agendas, attendance sheets, and invitations to parents in preferred languages will be maintained by the parent coordinator. Parents are notified by personal phone calls in native language, robo-calls in native language, letters in native language (both by mail and 2018-19 CEP-RISE 98  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities backpacked), Skedula, Class Dojo, and Remind-App text program. Translation needs of parents at all meetings are met via simultaneous translation headphone system that was purchased last year. Providers for PTHVP, APTT and El Puente workshop are provided by trained teachers and El Puente staff. Teachers and El Puente staff attended training by national PTHVP office and APTT training by West Ed through the Community Schools office. PTHVP/APTT schecule: August - September - First PTHVP meeting October - Curriculum workshop - Teachers November/December - Language Acquisition Strategies and High School Workshop January - March - Teaching testing strategies (NYSLAT, ELA and Math) April - June - High school transition workshop and applying for summer enrichment programs. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 99  2018-19 CEP-RISE 100  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 14 School Name MS 50 John D. Wells Borough Brooklyn School Number 050 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Ben Honoroff Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Olwen Abergas Teacher/Subject Area James Whitaker Teacher/Subject Area Jason Warren Related-Service Provider Corrine Geasor Superintendent Alicja Winnicki Assistant Principal N/A Coach N/A School Counselor Mariyn Sostre Parent type here Parent Coordinator Jahaira Rodriguez Field Support Center Staff Member Camila Holmes Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 1 0 D. Student Demographics 1 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification 1 Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 3 (teaching Fellows who will receive their ill 2018-19 CEP-RISE 101  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 270 Total number of ELLs 51 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 18.89% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 4 3 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 0 7 0 8 1 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 Tot # 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? NYSESLAT, LAB R, Interim Assessments. The data is recorded in the student's individual profile which helps us to monitor academic progress. Based on the data, students get assigned to AIS. In addition, students receive 5 periods per week of Word Generation, an academic language acquisiton curriculum. Research conducted on Word Generation shows greatest gains are made by ELL students 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 102  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We analyze the percentage of students moving levels on the NYSELAT exame, and we compare the results of the NYS ELA test with the NYSESLAT to see if there are any trends. The findings are presented to the school community 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Based on the data, on the average 30% of ELL students passed the NYSESLAT. More than 50% increased their proficiency level and likewise assessment is also conducted to monitor their profiency levels. Based on the Running Record results, our ELL students are one or two years below grade level in reading. Some students have decoding challenges while others have fluency challenges which impact on comprehension 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The organizational model for our transitional bilingual program is departmentalized. Students receive NLA and Social Studies from one NLA teacher, Ms. Hidalgo. In addition, they receive math and science from a certified bilingual teacher, Mr. Moran. For students in the free standing ESL program, there is a combination of push in and pull out programs. The ESL teacher co-teaches with the ELA teachers (Mr. Warren in grade 6, Mr. Whitaker in grade 7 and Ms. Kean in grade 8). Four students recevie pull out ENL students during 3 rd period, and 12 students receive pull out ENL services during 9 th period. Students receive push in ENL services during their ELA block for 5 45-minutes periods per week. Our ENL teacher collaborates with one ELA teacher one each grade level to provide ENL services that are aligned to ELA goals. b. TBE program. If applicable. Our TBE students follow a block model, travelling together in a heterogenious group of mixed proficiency levels in a 7/8 th grade class. TBE students recevie both push in and pull-out ENL services. Mr. Abergas pushes into NLA 5 periods per week. Mr. Abergas also provides 5 periods per week of pull-out ENL services to our TBE students. Our beginner ELL TBE students receive an additional 3 hours of after-school ENL classes from Mr. Abergas weekly. c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 103  a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Mandated instructional minutes are ensured at three separate stages in programming. First, during initial programming in May/June, the programmer and principal map out a plan for providing mandated minutes of instruction to all ENLs. Second, once results of NYCELAT and list noticed 6 th graders are available, programmer/principal rreview the program and make adjustments based on test data. Third, during early September, programmer/principal meet with ENL teacher Mr. Abergas to adjust his schedule to ensure mandated minutes are being met. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The content area instruction for the bilingual program is offered both in English and Spanish following the 50% in English and 50% in Spanish. The native laguage arts curriculum is aligned with the ELA curriculum with special emphasis on differentiated instruction with ESL methodologies. The free standing ESL program is offered in English aligned with the ELA curriculum. Native language glossaries are used in the free standing ESL program. When possible same language peer grouping is facilitated. Additionally, differentiated instruction and flexible grouping occur in the classroom. Visuals are also used in math, science, and social studies. During the pull out ESL program the teacher supports the acquisition of academic vocabulary and concepts in the content areas. All ELL students engage in Common Core aligned instruction using Expeditionary Learning materials. ESL and ELA teachers plan their instructional units collaborative using CCLS. The material is scafolded and SIOP methodology is used. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Our bilingual students receive NLA instruction where formative and summative assessments are conducted in Spanish. In addition they take the ELE test to determine Spanish comprehension of the Spanish language. All the NYS tests are administered in Spanish. The LAB-R test is used as a native language diagnostic assessment, and formative assessments are created by the bilingual teachers using Expeditionary Learning and CMP3 assessments as models that are adapted for use in our TBE program. . 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. ENL teachers confer with the ELA teachers to ensure that SIFE students are identified. Once this has been done, a review of data which includes and it not limited to the NYSELAT, NYS ELA test, interim assessments and teacher's formative assessments, is done. Instruction is differentiated to address the individual learning needs of the students. Some of the students identified as SIFE receive counseling and SIFE students with IEPs receive additional assistance from the SETSS services, CTT services, or are serviced by a selfcontained classroom teacher as detremined by the IEPs. b. Thus far all of our newcomers are in the transitional bilingual program. A breakfast program is offered to them to assist them in acquiring the social language and acclimating to the school envioroment. Students also participate in our expanded learning time ELT, attending ENL class 3 days per week. Additionally, students who will be taking the ELA test participate in an after-school program designed to provide them with reading and writing stategies aligned with requirements for the ELA test. c. For our ELL students (4-6 years) we provide the following services: The ENL teacher confers with all content area teachers to identify individulaized strength and needs of students. Further analysis of NYSESLAT modalities' results guides the ENL/ELA instruction. Some of these students receive SES services. d. An analysis of the data indicates that most long-term ELL students are in self-contained classes or are SIFE students. The ESL and ELA teachers confer and plan instruction based on the student's IEP e. Former ELLs receive push-in ELL services from Mr. Abergas. All content area teachers attend school based 8-week cycle of PD on differentiating instruction for ENL studnets, with a specific focus on language acquisition strategies. All former ELL students take part in the Word Generation curriculum. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 104  All ELL students and former ELL students receive test accomadations where mandated. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Our 8-week PD cycle on language acquisition strategies was delivered to all staff members. We focused on language acquisitions strategies from the research of Catherine Snow and Isabel Beck. We examined using content area glossaries and Spansih-English dictionaries as supports, and we implemented the Word Generation program (in both English and Spanish). Word Generation teaches 5 academic language acquisition words per week via an interdisciiplinary curriculum that is organized around a weekly high-interest debate topics. Our LPT team ensures that ELL-SWDs receive both services on their IEPs and ELL services via team meetings. Our LPT team coordinates with our SIT team and our programmer to ensure that ELL-SWD students in both freestanding ENL and bilingual receive mandated services. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ENL teachers confer with the IEP teacher and content area teachers to modify instructional materials. Some of the students have parallel schedules that llow them to receive mainstream services. We use flexibile programming in two areas: RIT and ELT. RIT (Reading is Transformational) is our parallel programmed reading period by grade. Each student is placed by level and interest into a reading class that meets their needs. RIT classes include strategic reading, debate, and Wilson. ELT is our expanded learning time. During this time, students are programmed by interest and need. Beginner ELL students get additional ENL classes, and ENL/TBE students who have low home language literacy are programmed for addiitonal Spanish, and/or phonemic awareness. ELT is also used to provide enrichment that will help develop English language acquisition through interest and passion. Teachers of ELT courses like music, art and crocheting integrate literacy and language acquisition skills into their classes, providing ENL students the opportunity to hear and practice Englsih language in different settings. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ENL teachers and content area teachers plan their units together during departmental team meetings on Tuesdays and Thursday mornings, and during grade team meetings 4 th period on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday. AIS services are provided to some ELL students and others are invited to the attend after-school and Saturday programs. Targeted interventions for reading/ELA/social studies include Wilson and debate classes. Targeted interventiosn for math/science include tutoring and homework help provided in by both grade level and bilingual math teachers. Math/Science targeted intervention also include enrichment ELT classes such as robotics and computer coding. Online individually paced math program IXL is also used as a targeted intervention.. NLA targeted intervention includes ELT Spanish class, as well as music parternship with Afro-Puertorican drummbing group Bomba-Yo. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We will be engaging in a 6-week Professional Develompent cycle on language acquisition strategies, that will hopefully yield greater coherence of instruction across grades and content areas. We will adopt Word Generation, a research tested language acquisition curriculum school wide, including in TBE in Spanish. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELL students have access to all school programs and are programmed for all cluster classes. We offer an extensive Expanded Learning Time program where all students, including ENL and SWD students indicate interest in 2 classes per semester. Classes include enrichment courses (debate, robotics, music, dance etc), advanced academic classes (algebra, living environment, 2018-19 CEP-RISE 105  advanced spanish), and AIS classes (Wilson, math/science tutoring). Students are programmed by both interest and need. ENL students participate in all three categories (enrichment, advanced academic, AIS). Our CBO partner also offers after-school from 4:00 - 6:30 and a summer camp. Classes are offered in art, music, leadership, and academics. ENL students participate in these programs as well. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Ipads, Smart Boards, Document Camera are used to meet the needs of ENL students and ENL subgroups. . All ELL students get content-area Spanish-English glossaries and Spanish-English dictionaries. Native language texts are used to support NLA. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is delivered in TBE via NLA classes taught by a licensed LOTE teacher and a licensed bilingual math teacher. Texts are provided in Spanish and teacher created materials are adapted from Expeditionary Learning and CMP3. ENL and ELA/Math learning objectives are aligned in team meetins. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Our bilingual students are clustered according to proficiency levels for ESL instruction. Our formar ELL students are clustered together in one class per grade 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Ipads, Smart Boards, Document Camera are used to meet the needs of ENL students and ENL subgroups. . All ELL students get content-area Spanish-English glossaries and Spanish-English dictionaries. Native language texts are used to support NLA. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We offer a summer parent orientation and our CBO partner, El Puente, offeres a free summer camp which includes enrichment classes, academic classes, and leadership development. CBO staff deliver and monitor summer camp actiitviies. Licenced ENL teacher and parent coordinator coordinate summer orientation. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Advanced Spanish in preparation for the high school Spanish proficiency exam. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Our ENL teachers and some of our ELA teachers have participated in city-wide ESL conferences . Opportunities for curriculum mapping and common preparation meetings are provided to all teachers of ELL students. All teachers are receiving 2018-19 CEP-RISE 106  professional development in the Common Core State Standards as we progress through the school year. Several of our ELA and content area teachers are advancing their knowledge of ESL methodologies by attending post-graduate programs and some are persuing ESL certification. As an entire school we have engaged in a 8-week cycle of PD on language acquisition strategies. This cycle has included, examining ELL data, looking at research by Catherine Snow and Isabel Beck on language acquisition strategies, training in implementing the Word Generation curriculum, and discussion of how to integrate into our curricula and teach students how to access language resources such as content-area glossaries and Spanish-Enlgish dictionaries. We also discussed ways to shift adult and student mindsets around bilingualism, viewing bilingualism as an asset to be celebrated not treated as a deficit. We are also using our participation in the Parent Teacher Home Visit Project and Academic Parent Teams to increase parental engagement and extend English language acquisition strategies into the home. This PD is calendared for September and October. As an entire school we have engaged in a 8-week cycle of PD on language acquisition strategies. This cycle has included, examining ELL data, looking at research by Catherine Snow and Isabel Beck on language acquisition strategies, training in implementing the Word Generation curriculum, and discussion of how to integrate into our curricula and teach students how to access language resources such as content-area glossaries and Spanish-English dictionaries. We also discussed ways to shift adult and student mindsets around bilingualism, viewing bilingualism as an asset to be celebrated not treated as a deficit. We are also using our participation in the Parent Teacher Home Visit Project and Academic Parent Teams to increase parental engagement and extend English language acquisition strategies into the home. This PD supports teachers in delivering CCLS aligned instruction by supporting their ability to differentiate CCLS assignments to meet the needs of ELL learners. By providing a laser focus on langugage acquisition strategies, we hope to increase our teachers ability to close the reading gap for ELL leanners and enable them to better access grade level texts. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The ENL teacher confers with content area teachers to share and develop instructional practices on a weekly basis. In addition, some of our faculty conferences and common preparation meetings are devoted to expose our faculty to ESL methodology. Our guidance counselor attends PD and inter-visitiations to help her effectively transition ELL students into MS and into HS. Our entire staff engages in our 8-week PD cycle. In developing the PD plan for the school, he principal in consultation with the ENL teacher and the LPT ensures that PD requirements are met. PD records are maintained in the principal's office. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? . Every year we begin a relationship with our ELL parents by conducitng Parent Teacher Home Visits (PTHVP) where we begin by discussing hopes and dreams for their children. The parents of all ELL students are invited to an orientation meeting where the programs are explained. Phone calls are made in both languages inviting parents to workshops. This year, we will be piloting the Academic Parent Teacher Team (APTT) model with our TBE students and families. Under this model, we will conduct 3 team meetings in which families are informed about grade level standards and expectations and given acitivies and strategies to extend learning into the home. This model also includes one individual meeting in which families meet one-on-one with NLA and ELL teachers. We also encourage content teachers to call ELL families once a week during "cafecito corner," our dedicated time for parental engagement. Additioanly, our CBO, El Puente, offeres ENL classes to adults in the evenings, and we encourage all ELL parents to attend these classes. All of our correspondence is in two languages; English, Spanish, and all meetings held at school are provided in both languages. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 107  2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 2. We are beginning to create a parent engagement tracking tool where we will track parental outreach and parental involvement, including home visits, phone calls, in-person meetings, attendance at school events. The Community Schools Director, Fiorella Guevara, is responsible for mainaing the se records. 3. We have seen growth this year in attendance at school events, including PTA meetings, SLT meetings and Father Breakfast. We attribute some of this growth to our Parent Teacher Home Visit Project (PTHVP) and trust building. All TBE parents and incoming 6 th grade parents receive a PTHVP home visit. The parent coordinator coordinates outreach in partnership with the Community Schools Director and Community Schools Parent Advocate. Parents are involved in adult education classes (including ENL) run by our CBO partner, El Puente. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP-RISE 108 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Benjamin Honoroff, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 109  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Benjamin Honoroff Title Principal Assistant Principal Jahaira Rodriguez Parent Coordinator Olwen Abergas ENL/Bilingual Teacher Rachel Montanez Parent Jason Warren/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Susan Cuthbert/Special Educati Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Marlyn Sostre School Counselor Alicja Winnicki Camilla Holmes Fiorella Guevara Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Community School Dir Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 11/2/15 11/2/15 11/2/15 11/2/15 11/2/15 11/2/15 11/2/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 11/2/15 11/2/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP-RISE 110  DBN: 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: 050 Superintendent: The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this (*Primary) conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. All parents/guardians of newly enrolled students fill out a Home Language Survey when enrolling their child. This form is maintained as part of the student’s record. If the parent/guardian indicates on the HLIS that they would like to receive information from the school in their home language, forms being sent home are translated either in written form or orally to the parent/guardian. Information from teachers is translated to parents by staff members who speak the home language. There are currently 42 ELLs at M.S. 50. One parent has requested information to be sent in Bengali. About fifty percent of the student population's home language is Spanish. The other forty nine percent identify the written and oral communication language in the blue cards is English. The DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit will be utilized if a parent/guardian should request these services. This was indicated on the HLIS as well as confirmed orally by a pedagogue who speaks the parents' home language. During parent orientation, the parents provide requests for language preference and they document their language preference on the emergency contact cards. Parent surveys are distributed in Spanish and Bengali, the language requested, as well as English which has been requested by the parents. The ATS Report of Preferred Languages is updated regularly in order to maintain accurate information on parent language choices ( RAPO ATS 2018-19 CEP-RISE 111  Report). Parent Blue Cards are also updated regularly to keep parent language choices current. Parent surveys are given out by the parent coordinator in order to maintain accurate data on parent language choices. Teachers also send home surveys by backpack or during parent conferences in order to collect parent data by class/grade. A report is generated using a variety of data sets in order to regularly update the languages that parents speak by class and/or grade. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Approximately fifty percent of the school’s population reports English as the primary language. The remaining fifty percent speak Spanish and one family speaks Bengali. The school’s demographic is made available on the school’s official DOE website and is periodically reported in our school’s newsletter. Teachers whose parents have elected to receive information in their home language have had this information communicated to them by the ENL teacher/coordinator. This was indicated on the HLIS. All other language needs are met through the utilization of the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 112 How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Documents which are distributed to parents/guardians and require translations are: annual handbooks, parent-teacher conference announcements, ELL parent orientation information letters, NYSESLAT testing notification and calendar, other NYS testing dates, curriculum overview, ELL entitlement and non-entitlement letters, as well as letters from the school leadership. Curriculum information is sent at the beginning of the school year. Testing dates and calendars are provided as soon as they become available in order to allow parent/guardians to prepare themselves as well as their children for upcoming events. Parent's Bill of Rights are distributed as they become available to the school. School annoucements, after school program information, general overview of student curriculum and letters from school leadership is translated in order to keep all parents aware and engaged on all school matters. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? MS 50 holds four parent conferences throughout the school year. The first, in September, introduces parents to their children's new grade and provides curriculum information. The next three, held in November, March and June are focused on student progress and grades. The ENL teacher holds a parent orientation for any newly enrolled ELL parent/guradian as well as separate meetings for individual ELL parent/guardians throughout the year. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 113  Teachers communicate with parents throughout the year in order to address questions/concerns as well as any possible issues in or outside of the classroom. If necessary, the guidance counselor will also be present during such meetings. In addition to these meetings, a designated one to one parent conference will take place annually in order to provide updates on student progress as mandated by CR Part 154. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) M.S. 50 has a multilingual welcome poster hanging in the main entrance to the school building so that everyone that enters the building is aware of language assistance services. Language I.D. guides are kept in at the security office as well as the main office. Information for parents on the N.Y.C.D.O. E.'s translation and interpretation services are available in 10 languages, and is kept at the security desk and main office. Parents' Bill of Rights are sent to the school is a variety of languages and they are distributed upon arrival to all parents who have indicated a preferred language other than English. Here at M. S. 50 the school staff are aware of language assistance services provided by the school by using data ( ATS Reports, Blue Cards and Surveys), updated roster of bilingual staff and The Translation and Interpretation Unit Services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 114  Parent surveys are distributed at the beginning of the year which gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services. The ENL teacher also meets individually with all parents/guardians of ELLs and can then also ascertain the needs and concerns that they may have. After such meetings,the ENL teacher confers with the parent coordinator and/or the classroom teachers in order to discuss the needs of the parents/guardians and students. In order to gather feedback from parents, we are creating a focus group of multilingual and multicultural parents to discuss their needs and the needs of their children. We can obtain information to inform our practices in order to improve the quality and availability of services we provide to parents and students. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 115 
