2018-19 RISE SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (R-CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 13K067 School Name: P.S. 067 CHARLES A. DORSEY Principal: KYESHA JACKSON 2018-19 CEP-RISE 1  Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles Section 3: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 4: Rise School Narrative Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Community School Partnerships Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 10: Title I Program Information Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP-RISE 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Charles A. Dorsey School 13K067 331300010067 Grades Pre-K-5 51 Saint Edwards Place (718) 834-6756 School Number (DBN): (718) 855 -4221 Phone Number: KyeshaJackson Fax: Kjackso5@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Community School CBO: Principal: Community School Director: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Geographical District: 13 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: TalBar-Zemer Ms. KyeshaJackson Mrs. EvitaClemmons Ms. ShatoyaCarmichael MaxxLuddy TBD N/A District Information Mrs. Zina Cooper- Williams Superintendent: 355 Park Place Brooklyn , NY zwilliams@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-623-5040 Phone Number: 718-636-3266 Fax: North Brooklyn FSC: Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: Bernadette Fitzgerald 2018-19 CEP-RISE 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 131 Livingston St., Room 501, Brooklyn, N.Y., 11201 bfitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-3728 Phone Number: 718-935-3362 Fax: 2018-19 CEP-RISE 4  Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles The Objective To guide, support and accelerate the early progress demonstrated by the schools graduating out of the Renewal program, as Rising Schools of Excellence (Rise), with a compelling theory of action, clear strategy for sustainment, targeted individualized supports, continued accountability, gradual release of responsibility, such that they independently accelerate their growth trajectory. Background Rise Schools have demonstrated: ● ● they have the will and conditions in place to accelerate student growth and meet school improvement benchmarks. they have the capacity to lead/implement a school improvement strategy. Rise Schools have seen some gains1 across multiple measures including graduation rates, college readiness, state test scores and attendance. As a result, these schools will fully transition out of the Renewal Schools program at the end of the 2017-2018 SY and continue under the guidance of the Office of Field Support, in partnership with the Office of School Support and Supervision. 1All Rise Schools met at least 67% of their benchmarks, are not on the State’s Priority list, and have demonstrated a sustainable school improvement structure that will allow them to build on their progress. Six Rise Keys for Continued Improvement 1. Strengthen the Instructional Core 2. Strengthen Instructional Leadership Capacity 3. 4. Apply a tiered approach to student intervention 5. Promote a positive, inclusive school environment for students, staff, parents and Improve Data Driven Practices community partners Increase monitoring and accountability 6. Theory of Action If the NYC Department of Education provides customized supports to Rise schools and principals designed around the “Six Rise School Keys for continued improvement” then, Rise principals and their teams will have the tools and resources to accelerate outcomes for ALL students and increase students’ access to an excellent and equitable education. Structure of the Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) The Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) will serve as the organizing and overarching document for each Rise school and will be directly aligned and developed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, and Strong Schools, Strong Communities, including the following: ● Rise Benchmarks: please refer to the 2018-19 Rise benchmarks provided to your school. ● Establishing an overarching summative vision aligned with elements of the Framework for Great Schools and documenting key areas of celebration and Rise through analysis of assessments and by envisioning what the desired outcome for each school will be at the end of the School Rise process. ● Setting mid-year point benchmarks that create the path for improvement by focusing on desired outcomes and goals. In this way, the plan will be mapped to the overarching summative vision. In addition to the five discrete goals formed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, each school will create an action plan. ● Transformation into a community school in order to increase student and family access to physical and mental health services and other social-emotional supports made available in or near the school. ● Expanded learning opportunities for all students, including additional instruction provided during afterschool and/or summer programming provided in collaboration with community partners. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 5  ● Intensive professional development for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and instruction aligned to the Next Generation Learning Standards (NGLS) and to support staff in effectively responding to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of all students. ● Additional, focused strategies to increase parent and family engagement. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Information on the Framework for Great Schools and the DTSDE Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and the R-CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 6  The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the American Institute of Research (AIR) Needs Assessment, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools – they call it a Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All Priority and Focus Schools and Focus 2018-19 CEP-RISE 7  Districts must use the new tool; and districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Education Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:  a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 8 a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC)  It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the R-CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the R-CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for R-CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists in every Rise school and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the American Institute of Research (AIR) needs assessment, the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Rise Key and the corresponding statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Discuss and respond to the guiding questions under each Framework element.  Step 5: Revisit your school’s current goals, and strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you have identified, and will let your school community know when you have reached your goal.  Step 6: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Complete the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and the Community School sections.  Step 9: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether strategies and activities outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust practices along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Rise Program Priorities Our Rise Theory of Action (page 4) is drawn from research1 on turnaround schools, the DOE Framework for Great Schools, DTSDE Tenets, and the Quality Review, which suggest that these key priorities have the greatest impact on student achievement. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 9  RISE Keys Priorities 1. Strengthen the Instructional Core 2. Strengthen Instructional Leadership Capacity 3. Improve Data Driven Practices 4. Apply a tiered approach to school support and intervention 5. Promote a positive, inclusive school environment for students, staff, parents and community partners 6. Increase monitoring and accountability  A clear focus aligned to students’ instructional needs, including college and career readiness  Access to common, standards-based curricula for all students, including ELLs and SWDs  Explicit and intentional embedding of culturally responsive Instruction in all content areas  Formative and summative assessments for all students in all grades that are aligned to curricula and produce clear evidence of learning  Tiered approach to teacher professional learning opportunities.  Partnership with families to increase engagement in students’ academic success  Implementation of a coherent vision for school improvement - a vision for leading learning, leading people, leading schools and leading change  Development of a system to support distributive leadership and build the capacity and sustainability of teacher leaders through continuous improvement  Developing leadership competencies, specific to turnaround efforts, including leveraging multiple stakeholders, a commitment to student learning and a sustained pursuit of measurable progress. Strategic allocation of resources to support instructional and professional learning plans and family engagement in leadership opportunities Integrative use of formative and summative assessment tools and practices to target resources and support throughout the year to achieve academic priorities    Ongoing analyses of school-wide and student-level data and adjustments to curricular resources and instructional moves  Prioritization of the use of standards and data to inform teaching and learning    Implementation of a tiered intervention system that engages teacher teams in frequent cycles of progress monitoring and adjustments to address diverse student needs School establishes coherent system, adopted by all to ensure that interventions are effective, differentiated and timely Increased use of teacher teams’ data-driven practices to accelerate student achievement  Clear strategy that establishes social norms within the school community and promotes a culture for learning with clear and high expectations for all students, in partnership with CBOs.  The sustainability of an environment where students feel safe, connected and engaged through practices that are culturally relevant and build their scholarly identity  The development of a whole school approach, in partnership with families, with   specific attention to social, physical and behavioral environments Social emotional learning practices embedded in teaching and learning as aligned to the Collaborative for Academic, Social and Emotional learning (CASEL) competencies and supported by CBOs. School leaders implement effective monitoring systems to ensure that instructional practices and interventions are monitored closely at the classroom, team, and school wide level  Establish effective teacher team practices that ensure teachers are accountable for data findings and set timely and appropriate interventions  Data analysis results in adjustments to the programs and priorities to better service   students Foster positive systems for accountability driven by reflection and action planning Support from district leaders to focus efforts toward results and problem solving actions that lead to turnaround success. 1. Darden/Curry PLE – Turnaround Leadership Competencies and Turnaround Action Shown to Influence Student Achievement 2018-19 CEP-RISE 10  Achievement Network – SY 18-19 Foundations Rubric COSEBOC Standards and Promising Practices for Schools Educating Boys of Color Harvard Graduate School of Education and Harvard Business School: Certificate in School Management and Leadership Learner-Centered Initiatives Multidimensional Principal Performance Rubric Monitoring and Accountability ● Rise schools will be monitored for implementation of the Rise Comprehensive Educational Plan (R+CEP) by Superintendents and Office of Field Support. ● Rise schools will be held accountable for making progress according to annual targets set by the Department of Education, as evidenced by their attainment of named benchmark scores for each annualized key metric. Schools not achieving annual targets by June 2019 are subject to additional oversight and consequences, to be determined at a later date. ● OFS will bring increased oversight and accountability by monitoring FSC supports to schools and ensure that these are aligned with the school’s instructional focus, student and teacher needs, and moving the school toward achieving interim goals. ● OSSS will monitor DSR oversight of all supports to Rise Schools. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 11  Section 3: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Directions: All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP). SLT members’ signatures indicates that they have been consulted with and given the opportunity to provide feedback on the plan and the plan’s alignment with the school-based budget to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Expanded Learning Time, Community School initiative, Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the second column. 2. 3. In the first column, indicate using an “X” if the person is an SLT member. In the third column, record the position and constituent group represented such as staff, parent, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), or other contributor. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 4. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the R-CEP, not approval. 5. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Signature (Blue Ink) Check if SLT X X X X X X Name Position and Constituent Group KyeshaJackson EvitaClemmons ShatoyaCharmichael Emily Clark TBD TalBar-Zemer N/A N/A Represented *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Community School Director (staff) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) 2018-19 CEP-RISE 12  Check if SLT Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Yvette Jackson Latoya Ramjit MaxxLuddy Sandra Camille Michelle Foster Luclos Joseph TieshaSinkler Amanda Davis X X X X X X Parent Parent Staff Staff Staff Parent Parent Staff Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP-RISE 13  Section 4: Rise School Narrative In a brief narrative, describe the current state of the Rise school addressing the following and please use existing data, where applicable: 1. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including your school’s mission statement and a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Identify any special student populations that the school has and what their specific needs are. 2. 3. Describe your school’s approach to family engagement and progress made with establishing families as partners in furthering student achievement 4. Describe how your school is leveraging community school partnerships to support progress in elements of the Framework for Great Schools and your Rise Benchmarks and indicate where this has been a challenge. 5. Summarize the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) opportunities that have been offered to your students this year. The Dorsey School serves students and families from the Raymond V. Ingersoll and Walt Whitman Houses and surrounding areas. This area of Fort Greene, Brooklyn has recently experienced tremendous change and growth. As a 191 year old potential landmark, the Dorsey School has a rich legacy that includes being the first public school for African Americans in Brooklyn. Many of our alumni have gone on to achieve success in the arts, athletics, and both the public & private sectors. With the support of community, we will strive to continue the legacy of success by empowering our scholars to set goals and identify clear & concise steps to achieve these goals. The Dorsey School is comprised of 220 students in Pre-Kindergarten through grade five. The demographics of our school community is 35% Hispanic, 52% African-American, 7% Asian, 8% English Language Learners and 29% students with disabilities. Ninety-One percent of our scholars are economically disadvantaged and are therefore entitled to highly qualified teachers who provide an engaging learning environment and utilize their unique skills in accelerating learning for all students. In addition to intensive learning in all classrooms, some of our scholars receive services from specially trained professionals such as, English as a New Language (ENL) teacher, Special Education Teachers, Support Service providers, a Speech and Language teacher, Occupational Therapist, Physical Therapist, Social Worker and School Psychologist. In addition, we have an on-site Department of Health nurse, who provides instruction on nutrition and wellness. Our mission is to provide the highest quality of educational services and opportunities to all students, parents, and staff in a safe & nurturing environment. We are dedicated to immersing our scholars in a culture of high academic achievement through an enriched and rigorous curriculum inclusive of the arts, athletics, and character education. Teachers participate in ongoing professional development with Teachers College at Columbia University for TC Writing and with Math Solutions to enhance teaching, learning, and professional growth to ensure scholars are immersed in rigorous learning experiences. We also invest in on site coaching to assist in the effective implementation of a Balanced Literacy Block. During the 2018-2019 school year we will continue to build capacity of learning with further participation in the Algebra For All program. With the success of the departmentalization of 5th grade, 4th grade will also adopt the same model. By departmentalizing 4th and 5th grade this will allow math instruction to be taught by one of our Model Teachers. Further departmentalization will continue to deepen the expertise of teachers while improving outcomes for students. The Dorsey School will sustain accountable talk in the classroom across all subject areas to improve academic vocabulary, critical thinking, and writing skills. In addition to our work around accountable talk, this year our 2018-19 CEP-RISE 14  instructional focus is: Fostering student independence. Based on observations from Principal Practice Observations (PPOs), instructional rounds and other data sources, our scholars require more opportunities to work independently and consistent engagement in productive struggle across all content areas. We are dedicated to providing an environment where student achievement is attained though an enriched curriculum, clear communication, and parental & community support. We are continuously exploring ways to increase family involvement.We continue to maintain and improve our community room, which is a space created to allow daily opportunities for parents to obtain resources and communicate with staff and other families in a warm and inviting setting. The community room is also used to host Parent Teacher Association (PTA) meetings, provide workshops on career awareness, resume writing, mental health and parenting assistance. We are continuously expanding our community school partnerships to increase the level of parental involvement, improved behavior, and overall school safety. These areas have presented challenges which we plan to address through initiatives and programs including, but not limited to Sanford Harmony and Multi-Tiered System of Supports (MTSS). This year we had added an Asthma Case Manager to educate, monitor and assist, families with asthma. We also opened a food pantry supported b the Food Bank of New York City where families can come and receive non perishable foods and fresh fruits and vegetables. A toiletry Program was started this year that supplies families with both hygiene & cleaning supplies. We continue to build partnerships that will enhance our learning community such as with the New York City Police Department: 88th Precinct Community Affairs Department, the Goodwill /Beacon after-school program and the New York Public Library. We will continue our partnership/collaborative initiatives with the Community Based Organization (CBO) and Partnership with Children (PWC). Partnership with Children has been integral in assisting with parent engagement by organizing family trips, facilitating workshops, providing food coupons, monitoring attendance, reaching out to parents, and offering assistance with services needed. Partnership with Children is also providing mental health services for families and bringing arts programming such as Studio in a School and Brooklyn Academy of Music (BAM) to every class as well as continuously writing grants to bring more enrichment programs to our scholars. With collaboration with our CBO, through trips and other incentives, student attendance has increased and helped provide a supportive learning environment. Scholars are participating in Expanded Learning Time (ELT) for 1 hour and 15 minutes a day, four days a week. During this time, we offer the following opportunities to enhance their critical thinking skills:  ·Junior Great Books - Junior Great Books supports all students, including English Language Learners (ELLs) and Students with Disabilities (SWDs) to think critically around complex text. This program uses the shared inquiry approach which enables children to explore the ideas, meaning and information found in text. Teachers will engage scholars in discussions that will empower them to think, listen and respond to questions and answers from others in their discussion groups.  City Lore - City Lore promotes a positive environment for students, while aligning the arts to the instructional program. It also engages youth in exploring the world of arts and culture in their lives and in the lives of others. Students will participate in dance and visual arts once per week with a culminating performance and exhibition at the end of each semester.  MyOn Digital Library - a digital literacy program which offers students with a vast selection of quality  literature which can be tailored to students' interests to develop a deep love for reading. MyOn tracks students reading activity and growth to provides teachers with actionable data to improve instruction. iReady ELA and Mathematics - online computer based program provides personalized student instruction targeted to students’ unique areas of needs. Provides rigorous, on-grade-level instruction and practice with Ready® and additional downloaded lessons to help meet individual student or small group needs.  Exemplars- In an effort to help our scholars achieve their fullest potential they are engaged in open-ended material to help them develop critical thinking and reasoning skills to solve real-world problems. Scholars develop the ability to apply skills and concepts to problem-solving situations and to communicate their thinking to others. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 15   Brooklyn Academy of Music (BAM) - students will learn about Africa and its diaspora through dance and music  in a residency that focuses on South Africa the home nation of Dance Africa 2018's visiting company. LEAP After School Program - an enrichment after school program that offers students creative avenues such as arts & crafts, drama and sports. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 16  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 13K067 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 219 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 37 35 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 15 14 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 99.0% % Attendance Rate 98.2% % Reduced Lunch 10.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.4% 31.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.09 0% 13% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 28.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 79% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 11 11 91.5% 0.9% 33.8% 58.9% 6.4% 1.8% 0 6% 9.5 29.2% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP-RISE 17  2018-19 CEP-RISE 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. (aligned to Rise Keys 2 and 6) Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. (aligned to Rise Key 3) The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. (aligned to Rise Keys 1 and 4) Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. (aligned to Rise Key 1) 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? School leaders and faculty ensure that curricula are aligned to CCLS and/or content standards and strategically integrate the instructional shifts, resulting in coherence across grades and subject areas that promotes college and career readiness for all students through the following:  Scholars are participating in Expanded Learning Time for one hour and 15 minutes a day, four days a week. During this time, we offer the following opportunities to enhance their critical thinking skills through: o Junior Great Books - uses the shared inquiry approach, which enables children to explore the ideas, meaning and information found in text. Teachers will engage scholars in discussions that will empower them to think, listen and respond to questions and answers from others in their discussion groups. o MyOn Digital Library - a digital literacy program which provides students with a variety of literature based on their own interests and reading ability and provides writing to enhance their experience. MyOn tracks students reading activity and growth and provides teachers with actionable data to improve instruction. iReady ELA - online computer based program provides personalized student instruction targeted to students’ unique areas of needs. iReady provides rigorous, on-grade-level instruction and practice with Ready and additional downloadable lessons to help meet individual student or small group needs. o  Classrooms are equipped with laptops, iPads, and desktop computers in order to fully implement all programs including i-Ready and MyOn.  During the 2018 - 2019 school year, teachers, administrators and staff will continue to strengthen their skills to analyze the miscues from the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project (TCRWP) running records and plan 2018-19 CEP-RISE 19  strategy lessons for small groups of students. As a school, we decided to revise our reading assessment system so that we could have a clearer picture of how our students were scoring in the areas of reading comprehension and fluency. All students in grades K - 5 take the iReady Diagnostic three times per year. Students in grades 3 - 5 will take the Ready ELA assessment in addition to I-Ready. Teachers have also been trained on the administration of TC assessments and will analyze the results using the Data Wise approach to inquiry. By doing this, teachers will be able to plan rigorous Common Core aligned lessons and strengthen their Tier 1 instructional practices.  Teachers, paraprofessionals, and administrators will use the ReThink online professional development platform to enhance their pedagogical practices and their capacity to support students with disabilities. School has model teachers that help mentor/model lessons for teachers  Curriculum maps in all subject areas with periodic updates throughout the school year  Opportunities for after school, weekend, and summer retreats for planning and writing of curriculum maps  Allocate time for weekly vertical and horizontal grade team meetings  Opportunities for on site and off site professional development   Teachers integrate the use of rubrics and checklists in student work  Teachers give students immediate feedback based on rubrics in the form of a "glow" and a "grow"  Teachers use protocols to educate students with using both rubrics and checklists to self-assess  Teachers address vocabulary through circle maps, Fundations and Junior Great Books  Teachers are held accountable for differentiating the needs of English Language Learners (ELLs) and Students with Disabilities (SWDs). This is done through small group instruction facilitated by educational assistants, Intergrated Co-Teaching (ICT) teachers, ENL teachers and model teachers.  ENL teacher will facilitate after school and Saturday Academy program to support ELL growth during this time students will participate in targeted data based instruction as well as using the Imagine Learning computer based program  Based on the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs listed above, some of our school's needs are the following:  The Implementation of a systemic plan for rigorous and coherent curricula, based on more consistent use of inquiry practices and processes that impact time management, pacing, planning, and all mandated curriculum areas Increase student voice through accountable talk to both build and reveal new understanding of content and practice Increase student independence   Teaching strategies (including questioning, scaffolds in English and/ or native language where appropriate, and routines) that strategically provide multiple entry points and high-quality supports and extensions into lessons Student work products and discussions need to reflect high levels of student thinking, participation and ownership    More continuity in analyzing data to drive instruction in all academic areas  Teachers to consistently provide actionable feedback to move student academic performance, and the consistency of ongoing checks for understanding and student self-assessment.  Unit and lesson plans need to be consistently revisited and revised based on data analysis and memorialized in  the teacher inquiry team rolling agendas Stagger arts programming so that students are participating in arts residencies and minimizing the number of instructional periods being lost  More consistent use of school wide system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Rigorous Instruction What is your school’s instructional focus? What is your vision for promoting the instructional focus consistently across classrooms? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 20  The instructional Focus for the 2018 - 2019 school year is to foster student independence by improving student proficiency levels in all academic areas through the facilitation of cognitively demanding tasks that encourage students to explain their thinking through verbal, visual and written expression. Another significant focus for the 2018 - 2019 school year is on designing coherent instruction across content areas that are aligned to the Common Core Standards. Through the effective use of questioning, discussion and assessment techniques, students will have the tools to think critically and engage in meaningful academic discussions. The following program practices will be implemented by establishing rigorous learning targets, ("I can" student statements), higher order questioning and discussion techniques, paired-partner learning, small group instruction, the use of the depth of knowledge taxonomy, and common core aligned assessments. In addition, the use of flexible grouping, differentiated, collaborative and modified learning strategies will be inputted. Administrators and staff will continue to strengthen their skills to create a cohesive data analysis structure, to inform data driven instruction and adjust lessons and individualized supports. Professional collaborations of teachers across grades will examine best practices for moving students along the progressions of learning for independent reading and writing using Teachers College Writing Units of Study, structured independent reading time using enhanced classroom and MyOn digital libraries. This year we will implement the Envision Math program along with Exemplars Math and Number Talks to balance math fluency, conceptual understanding and problem solving. Classrooms will be equipped with laptops, iPads, and desktop computers in order to fully implement all programs including I-Ready, MyOn and Imagine Learning. How will you implement a standards-aligned curricula that meets the needs of your diverse learners, including ELLs and SWDs? Our vision for the implementation of CCLS-aligned curricula that meets the needs of our diverse learners, personally, academically, and culturally is to ensure we are not teaching to the curriculum but using the curriculum as a resource to prioritize the standards. School administrators have established high expectations for all students including but not limited to English Language Learners and students with IEPs. All classrooms are exposed to the same resources that engage in learning. Additional resources include: trade books, SMART Boards, manipulatives, laptops, desktops, writing centers and i-Pads. We also will continue to use the Passport social studies curriculum that is fully aligned to the NYS Scope and Sequence along with the instructional shifts of balancing the use of informational text to build content knowledge. Through small group instruction facilitated by educational assistants, ICT, ENL and teacher leaders, ELLs and SWDs will have differentiated instruction to meet their individual needs. The ENL teacher will also facilitate after school and Saturday Academy programs to support ELL growth. During this time students will participate in targeted data based instruction as well as use the Imagine Learning computer based program which is specifically designed for ELLs. What is your vision for ensuring that all student have access to rigorous coursework that moves them towards career and college readiness? How will you support the personal and academic skills, habits, and behaviors needed for students to be career and college ready? Our vision for diverse program offerings is to include programs that support coherence across the grades in both ELA and Mathematics. By hiring an independent literacy consultant and implementing Junior Great Books, students receive a balance of both informational and literary text. Teachers also receive support in best practices for implementation of 2018-19 CEP-RISE 21  balanced literacy. These programs also expose our students to rich academic vocabulary and encourages the use of text based answers to assess student comprehension. We will also continue to use the Passport Social Studies curriculum which will continue to provide a means for engaging all student K-5 in the reading, critical analysis, discussion and writing in response to informational text. The new Amplify Science program will be taught by the Model Teacher Leader to grades K-5 and embeds science inquiry, analysis and design through the promoted use of domain specific and academic vocabulary. We will promote independent scholarly behaviors through the use of rubrics & anchor papers in Writing, Math, and Science for students to receive immediate & appropriate feedback, reflect on said feedback, and make adjustments to their work as needed. All staff will support the development of vocabulary skills across content areas through consistent and targeted use of center activities utilizing the Practice Guide for Vocabulary Instruction provided by the Office of Teaching and Learning. How do you envision embedding the elements of culturally responsive instruction and how will you know that implementation is successful? To ensure our delivery of our instruction is set up for students success we will ensure that the teachers are using effective strategies and best instructional practices across all classrooms. By using the I Do, We Do, You Do approach to delivering instruction, teachers will have the opportunity to model practices, perform guided practice and then have students work independently. On-going summative and formative assessments will give teachers the opportunity to assess the effectiveness of instructional practices on academic achievement and group students according to achievement level to provide additional support to those who need it. We continue to build high expectations for students through the use of rubrics to self and peer assess in all subject areas. In addition, teachers parents and students participate in data chats to monitor their progress throughout the year. To enhance our work of teachers as facilitators , we have incorporated systems and structures for independent, pair and whole group work in a thoughtful and deliberate way. We will continue to use anchor charts to memorialize the big ideas and process within concepts to scaffold students' independent and collaborative completion of rigorous tasks. As a method of monitoring the impact of the aforementioned teachers, we will embed formative assessments into lessons that will encompass talk moves to promote accountable talk/content discourse and active listening as opportunities for checking for students' understanding. What is your vision for the use of a comprehensive assessment strategy (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, and summative) to drive curricular, instructional, and organizational decisions that impact student outcomes? We envision teachers using data and assessments to drive the success of every child. Teachers will create literacy centers based on i-Ready assessment data that is also aligned to the standards being taught in the classroom. Teachers will engage students in conferencing to work on specific standards the student is deficient in. Students will be taught the purpose and uses of rubrics and checklists in all subject areas to assist them in self assessing their work. All classes have also been equipped with i-Pads, laptops, and/or desktops to provide students, that are visual learners, the opportunity to utilize websites such as MyOn, and i-Ready. During the 2018 - 2019 school year, teachers, administrators and staff will continue to strengthen their skills to analyze the miscues from the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project (TCRWP) running records and plan strategy lessons for small groups of students. As a school, we decided to revise our reading assessment system so that we could have a clearer picture of how our students were scoring in the areas of reading comprehension and fluency. All students in grades K - 5 take the iReady Diagnostic three times per year. Students in grades 3 - 5 will take the Ready ELA and Math 2018-19 CEP-RISE 22  assessment in addition to I-Ready. Teachers have also been trained on the administration of TC assessments and will use analyze the results using the Data Wise approach to inquiry. By doing this, teachers will be able to plan rigorous Common Core aligned lessons and strengthen their Tier 1 instructional practices. How do you envision differentiating teacher professional learning opportunities to support instructional foci, meet students’ unique needs and advance culturally responsive education in your school? Teachers, Administrators and Educational Assistants will use the ReThink online professional development to enhance the pedagogical practices of Special Education Teachers and all Educational Assistants in working with students on the autism spectrum. Peer Collaborative Teacher/Model Teachers/Data Wise Champion: Assist leadership team with immersing experienced teachers in strengthening their use of delving into student data and examining instruction to develop and execute action plan in cycles while building the assessment literacy of newly hired teachers. Our Teacher Leaders will support new teachers with getting up to speed on the use of the balanced literacy and TC writing program as well as the Exemplars problem solving process and Number Talks routine. Our technology teacher will continue to support staff and students in the implementation and analysis of MyOn and IReady, ELA and Mathematics. All teachers will use of the Rigor and Engagement rubrics for peer and self-reflection on pedagogical practices on executing rigorous tasks, promoting academic discussions and the effective use of assessments to align tiered professional learning on and off-site. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By the end of June 2019, 100% of teachers will execute instruction that requires all students to complete challenging tasks and engage in peer-to-peer discussions that will result in an increase in the average proficiency in ELA. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Average Proficiency in ELA Collaborative Teachers N/A 2018-19 CEP-RISE 23  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Data collected: guided reading groups, informal assessments and running records Advance Data Teachers will create the conditions for student conversations where students are encouraged to talk about each others thinking. Students talk and ask questions about each others thinking. (Core Action 3D) Teachers will employ questions and tasks that address the text by attending to its meaning/purpose and/or language , structures or knowledge demands. (Core Action 2A) Model teachers and Universal Literacy coach, and Literacy Consultant will enhance teacher content knowledge, pedagogical practices and instructional implementation by facilitating on-going professional development opportunities, classroom September 2018 - June 2019 School leader, assistant principal, all teachers, educational assistants, Literacy Coach, model teachers K-5 students Average proficiency in ELA K - 5 Average proficiency in ELA Sept. School leader, assistant principal, and all teachers Advance Data 2018 - June 2019 K - 5 students Average proficiency in ELA Sept. 2018- June 2019 Model teachers, consultants Collaborative Teachers Snapshot Assessments ELA performance tasks Data collected from I Ready, Ready NY, ELA Performance Assessments , Running Records, guided reading groups, conferencing notes and informal assessments. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 24  inter-visitations and modeling best instructional practice in ELA. Each session will be aligned to supporting teachers in the implemetation of Core Actions 1B, 2A and 3D. LIteracy Coach and Literacy consultant will support teachers in choosing grade level appropriate text. (Core Action 1B) K - 5 Average proficiency in ELA January 2019 - June 2019 Literacy Coach Literacy Consultant Advance Data Running Records Guided Reading groups Informal Assessments 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Classroom and model teachers will facilitate on-going workshops for parents to support their understanding of rigorous instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home. Classroom teachers will facilitate two Parent Teacher Team Meetings which will engage families in hands on activities which can be used to support their children at home. Workshops will begin in September 2018 and scheduled by the Parent Coordinator. Parent Teacher Team Meetings will be scheduled for October 2018 and January 2019 and will be coordinate by the Parent Coordinator and Community School Director. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. Set Aside funding for consultants, IReady Reading, Ready NY, and Imagine Learning Set Aside funding for Literacy Consultant for grades 3 - 5. Hire Substitute teachers to instruct students while teachers are assessing students reading levels and attending PD Model teachers will have an additional prep/week to assist teachers in the classroom Teachers will be given t two common preps/week which will be used for inquiry and planning Classes will be equipped with iPads and/or laptops 2018-19 CEP-RISE 25  Purchase TeachBoost to assist with documentation of teacher observations, next steps and success in implementation Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By January 2019, 60% of teachers will receive an effective rating in Danielson 1A :Demonstrating knowledge of Content and Pedagogy, 1E: Designing Coherent Instruction and 3B: Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques as measured by Advance Data. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Interim assessments, running records, performance tasks, Ready and IReady assessments and Advance data. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. (aligned to Rise Key 4) 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. (aligned to Rise Key 4) 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. (aligned to Rise Key 5) 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. (aligned to Rise Key 5) X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 5. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? The school has made great inroads in creating a safe and supportive environment. For the past two years we have worked to implement a trauma informed framework school wide. Students have access to individualized services offered by Partnership with Children (PWC) social workers as well as the on site mental health clinic. Meanwhile teachers are trained in crisis de escalation to help students experiencing difficulty handle challenges and return to their classes with the help of supportive adults. Opportunities to explore artistic interests through integrated arts residencies tie social and academic skills to arts learning by offering opportunities for students to be supported in exploring interests and opportunities beyond the classroom. Through the MTSS pilot program the social emotional team has overhauled the multi-tiered support system ensuring that behavior expectations are uniform building wide and that teachers and staff are supported in consistently maintaining behavior expectations and communicating and teaching these expectations to children appropriately. A key component of maintaining a safe and supportive environment is modeling and offering encouragement for positive behaviors. The Dorsey Bucks system offers a supportive frame for recognizing and encouraging good citizenship and positive contribution. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 27  Through the MTSS pilot the social emotional team monitors behavior and climate reports consistently and adjusts approach to assure implementation and fidelity to the MTSS plan. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Supportive Environment What is your vision for a supportive school environment? How will you, in partnership with each CBO and families, enact your vision? The link between families and positive behavioral interventions and supports is an important one. When families are meaningfully involved in educational activities their children do better in school. Families play an important part in their child's education and social development. The home component will be informed as to the implementation of the program and how it will impact their children. The MTSS team and the CBO will collaborate in providing parents with training in explaining and demonstrating the expected behavior to their children and the positive rewards as well as the consequences. Suggestions given to the parent will include setting goals and a rewards program for the child. There could be a "menu" of rewards, some big, some small that a child can relate to at home. Our school will begin by establishing clear expectations for behavior that are taught, modeled and reinforced across all settings and by all staff. This provides a host environment that supports the adoption and sustained use of effective academic and social/emotional instruction. Teachers and students deserve school environments that are safe, supportive and conducive to teaching and learning. Creating a supportive school climate and decreasing suspensions and expulsions require close attention to the social, emotional and behavioral needs of all students. The school will implement the PBIS program school wide. A team will be formed to determine the methods, techniques and strategies that will be used to implement the program efficiently and effectively. The Dorsey Bucks token system will be put into place. The entire staff will be given a supply of Dorsey Bucks that they will use to reward student who are doing something positive. Every Friday during lunch, students will be permitted to make purchases of various sorted items using the Dorsey Bucks they have earned. In addition to the Dorsey Bucks we will also use Class Dojo. Class Dojo is a web based program that allows all staff to reward scholars for good behavior, helping others and achieving academically. It also allows parents to see their children's progress in real time and communicate with teachers through Dojo messaging. Students who perform well academically, display positive behavioral growth and/or illustrate the meaning of the monthly character principle will be publicly recognized with a certificate presented by the principal, attend a private luncheon and have their picture taken for display in the schools main first floor corridor. Describe your plan to implement a culture of trust and high expectations for teachers, students, families and community partners. It is is very important to set clear expectations for the children from the very beginning. The best way to share and implement a sense of trust and high expectations for students is by creating a a sense of community within the building. The core value of community is embedded in our daily routine through school wide morning meeting where the whole school, lead by our building leader signs the school song and chants the schools mantra. Each teacher has their own unique way of greeting their students in the morning before class begins. To help implement trust and high expectations between teachers and students, we will continue to use the Sanford Harmony social emotional learning program within the classroom. The program will be utilized in professional 2018-19 CEP-RISE 28  development and parent workshops to ensure that teachers, families, and students have a sense of community and expectation on how to effectively communicate with one another. To implement a culture of trust and high expectations for community partners, we will continue to work closely with Partnership with Children and Brooklyn Center for Psychotherapy in sharing their services with families and the student body. We will also strengthen relationships with other community based organizations such as Cumberland Hospital, The Brooklyn Public Library, Youth Achievement, Grow NYC, BAM, Read Ahead, City Lore, Studio In A School, Power My Learning, and LEAP. It is very important that students and their families feel supported both academically and social emotionally and are educated on the services that are available to them being that we are a community school and we believe in fostering the growth of the whole child. Who are your CBO partners? How will each CBO sustain and support the social-emotional and academic growth of your students? Trauma informed training, one on one counseling, classroom push ins, therapeutic groups. CBO Focus Provide mental health services on-site CBO Partner Partnership with Children Brooklyn Center for Psychotherapy How will you, in partnership with your CBO, create a supportive and engaging environment for your students’ families? Partnership with Children works with families to support engagement for families through social and educational family engagement activities. PWC involves parent voice in setting the agenda for the year which includes putting priority on enrichment activities during the school day and in after-school, building community partnerships with local institutions including churches, the police precinct and local business and arts organizations. PWC will emphasize the parent role in academic success by offering opportunities for families to partner with the school for parent success as well as volunteer in the school throughout the day. Partnership offers support for teachers in maintaining a healthy learning climate through professional development on trauma informed teaching. Partnership also works individually with students to develop social emotional skills that allow them to more fully participate in classroom and learning activities. Through individual and group counseling as well as engaging and supportive parent activities and group sessions partnerships works within the fabric of the school community to build a supportive and positive culture. What essential questions, or key themes, will be explored by all staff and students that acknowledge and celebrate the culture and heritage of the student body? Members of The Brooklyn Academy of Music (BAM) introduced our students to various styles of African dance and students performed what they have learned to the school community including parents and other family members. Studio In A School also introduced students to various artists from around the world and had them create their own art pieces based on what they have learned and share them at an in-house art exhibit. We also provide parents with several translated versions of handouts (e.g.: school and class newsletters), in addition to the digital form of communication we offer through Class Dojo which gives parents the option to view school communication in their home language as well. What evidence will you use to gauge the impact of your plan to create a positive school environment? Using OORS reports to track school incidents is one way to measure the school's positive environment. In an effort of being proactive, the social worker from partnership with children along with the therapist from Brooklyn Center for Psychotherapy have and will continue to hold small lunch groups for children who have difficulty in large settings 2018-19 CEP-RISE 29  (through boys and girls groups). The school counselor will also continue to work with a targeted group of girls during lunch and after school when necessary. The community school form is platform which allows parents and other community members an opportunity to voice their opinion and help shape the direction of the school. Parents, students, and community members are given an opportunity to share what works and what does not. The PTA has an opportunity to shared positive and constructive information with the school staff to strengthen the relationship with the community. Monthly school leadership team meetings are another way to share information to gauge the impact of the school environment. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Supportive Environment. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By June 2019 90% of staff will fully implement and execute our school wide multi-tiered support system resulting in a decrease in serious incidents as measured by OORS data. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal? Average ELA and Math Proficiency Decrease in student time outside of the classroom due to crisis Attendance Reduction in OORS incidents 2018-19 CEP-RISE 30  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. All staff members will attend professional development sessions on the school-wide MTSS best practices to solidify how it will be utilized in our school. Also at these monthly meetings, all staff members will be trained on how to effectively utilize Classroom Behavior Modification strategies. MTSS team will monitor how the school-wide behavior system is being utilized throughout the school and support staff members who need assistance with sustaining their use of the support systems. All Classrooom Teachers will set up Class Dojo for their class and all out of classroom staff will link to classes to reward students and communicate with parents Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All staff Collaborative Teachers Sept. 2018 - Principal, June 2019 Assistant Principal, Teachers PWC, school counselor How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Decrease in serious incidents. Consistent consequences and rewards across the school SLT chair, Collaborative Teachers Guidance Counselor, Sept. 2018 - PBIS Team, June 2019 Teachers Decrease in serious incidents. IEP teacher, PWC, Brooklyn Psychotherapy Teacher, Staff, Parents Student Attendance Collaborative Teachers Parent Involvement Sept. 2018 - PBIS Team, June 2019 Teachers, Decease in serious incidents. Partnership with Children Increase in Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP-RISE 31  MTSS team will work alongside the BFSC to create action plans and assess effectiveness of strategies used. MTSS Team, Student Attendance BFSC PBIS Team September 2018 - June 2019 Decrease in serious incidents Collaborative Teachers 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent workshops, academic parent teacher team meetings, yearly community gatherings, and family game night are some of the events put in place to address the academic and social emotional needs of our students. These events also serves as additional opportunities to share the importance of creating a bridge between school and family ties in an effort to increase parental involvement. As a school community, we make it very clear that the involvement of parents, families, and community organizations are all welcomed and encouraged. The time line for said events take place before school starts. Before school begins, Partnership with children in collaboration with the school's administrative team holds a back to school event. It is at this even that parents are first introduced to some of the many community based organizations that are available to them in a warm and welcoming way. The use of Class Dojo among the staff to communicate with parents are monitored by the school's administrative team and Class Dojo mentors to ensure that both parents and staff are utilizing the tool correctly and efficiently throughout the year (from beginning to end). The Multi-Tiered System of Supports will be implemented from the beginning of school to set the foundation for students. The MTSS team and chairperson, along with administration will be responsible to ensuring the implementation of those practices throughout the year. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. Funding will be set aside to purchase incentives for the Dorsey School store Time will be allotted for members of the MTSS team to meet to plan and implement strategies Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title I 1003(a) Title III X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring 2018-19 CEP-RISE 32  Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By January 2019, 40% off staff will effectively implement strategies to support the multi-tiered system of support as measured by a decrease in OORS reports for incidents and accidents. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS reports Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 33  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. (aligned to Rise Key 2) 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. (aligned to Rise Key 1) 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. (aligned to Rise Key 4) 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). (aligned to Rise Key 3) X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? P.S. 67 has a positive collaborative environment and a supportive professional community. Teachers meet as a team to use the data wise inquiry approach to analyze data and create a plan to modify instruction so that the student needs will be addressed. This will result in revised unit plans, lesson plans, and will be memorialized in the minutes of all rolling agendas. For the 2018 - 2019 academic school year, we will continue to enhance our grade team meetings to ensure the time is being used effectively. Our school has allotted time for inquiry and vertical grade team meetings. Teachers have opportunity to further collaborate through extended planning time. Teachers work together to ensure that all academic and social emotional needs are met. We do this through accountable talk, rigorous planning, turn and talk, and on going assessment. School leaders will continue to utilize the Danielson Framework to provide teachers with supportive feedback and next steps to guide their instruction. In addition, professional developments will be tailored to the general observed needs of the teachers in the school, as a whole, by grade level, and individualized basis. Based on previous observations all staff members will continue to use a universal protocol to ensure consistency across all grades. Teacher teams meet weekly and use the rolling agenda to monitor the consistency and efficiency of planning time to ensure it is being used effectively across all grade teams and has a positive impact on student achievement. Based on the Quality Review (QR) and the Principal Performance Observation (PPO) our school's needs are:  A double preparation period for teachers geared towards planning, inquiry, and collaboration.  Bi-monthly Instructional Cabinet meetings 2018-19 CEP-RISE 34   The Instructional Cabinet turn key information to staff that includes changes to school systems and structures (ie. Expanded Learning Time (ELT), RTI, AIS) Part 2 – Summative Vision for Collaborative Teachers What is your vision for collaborative teaching? Our vision is to integrate planning time for vertical grade team and inquiry meetings that occur consistently through out the school year. Teachers will attend professional development sessions, meet after work and during their common periods so that they are able to receive feedback and instructional guidance across the grades. All teachers will collaborate to develop lesson plans using a workshop model methodology. Teachers will begin their lessons with rubrics and "I can" statements, and will align learning targets with CCLS and work to identify multiple points of access to achieve targeted goals. How do you envision enhancing collaboration amongst your Instructional Leadership Team to improve teacher practices and student learning? The Instructional Cabinet meets bimonthly to analyze data, identify trends, and plan for the implementation of systems and structures that enable rigorous instruction to take place on a daily basis. With this information based on the outcome of these meetings, the Instructional Cabinet will turnkey any modifications of systems & structures to staff during professional development (PD) time on Mondays and/or grade team meetings. Teacher leaders and ENL teacher will conduct weekly coaching visits with classroom teachers to provide support in the implementation of rigorous instruction, effective station teaching and using assessment in instruction. How do you envision collaboration within teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? Teacher teams will work together to share best practices, turn key information from off site professional development and work together to analyze student data. During the 2018 - 2019 academic school year, the teacher teams will meet two consecutive periods per week for a total of 90 minutes. They will also participate in inter-visitations and provide peer to peer targeted and actionable feedback in order to improve teacher practices and student learning. How do you envision collaboration across teacher teams to improve data driven teacher practices that result in improvement in student achievement? What data will teachers and the Instructional Leadership Team regularly review to ensure that they are reflecting upon needed adjustments to teaching practices and meeting individual student learning needs? Data Reviewed Standards based Snapshot Assessments iReady Mathematics Intent Standards based assessments created by teachers using resources such as Schoolnet and MyAnet. Teachers have the ability to check student mastery of a standard using a 6 - 8 question assessment. These snapshot assessments also decrease the amount of interruptions to the pacing of the curriculum. iReady is a computer based program that identifies student needs based on on-going assessments. All lessons are assigned based on the specific needs of the student and allows the instructional team and classroom students to accurately and efficiently group students so that all lessons have a positive impact on student learning. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 35 IEP Goals By reviewing IEP goals regularly, teachers are able to assess students who are on track to achieve those goals and update IEPs accordingly. Teachers and educational assistants will also track students IEP goals on a supportive log to ensure the student's goals are being met as well as standards for the grade. In addition, teachers will be able to modify lesson and unit plans to ensure that they are meeting the needs of the students. Describe the screening process you use to identify students who need extra help? How do you use this process to determine which intervention to provide? We use iReady reports, summative assessment data, snapshot assessments, teacher observations, and parent recommendations to identify students with specific deficiencies. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will engage with the Data Wise protocol to complete one inquiry cycle in mathematics with the purpose of mastering the standards as measured by the snapshot assessments. In grades 3-5, greater emphasis will be placed on the lowest 5 standards that were reported in the 2018 June Instructional Report. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal? Average Math Proficiency Collaborative Teachers Effective School Leadership N/A 2018-19 CEP-RISE 36 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Consultants, lead teachers and administrators will facilitate professional development sessions in Mathematics with a focus on the CCLS and how aligning our curriculum to the standards will improve academic achievement. The school will participate in one cycle of mathematics inquiry using the Data Wise Protocol. Teachers will create standards based snapshot assessments using SchoolNet or MyAnet How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Periodic assessments Principal, Assistant Principal, Model teachers Data Wise Team Unit and Chapter tests Snapshot assessments Periodic Assessments Unit and Chapter Test Snapshot Assessments Snapshot Assessments Classroom Teachers Model Teachers ADVANCE data Rigorous Instruction Teachers K-5 Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Average Math Proficiency Data Wise Team Average Math Proficiency Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Teachers K-5 Collaborative Teachers Rigorous Instruction Average Math Proficiency Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Model Teachers will work alongside new and developing teachers to improve pedagogical practices in Domains 1 New Teachers Rigorous Instruction Average Math proficiency 2018-19 CEP-RISE 37  & 3 of the Danielson Framework. Developing Teachers 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Teacher Teams gives families the opportunity to meet with teachers, look at student data and plan intentional and strategic efforts to assist students. Families will have a network of support with other families in the classroom in an effort to build and maintain positive relationships and share strategies with each other. Teachers will provide ongoing workshops to inform families of academic initiatives. Newsletters and calendars are sent home monthly to keep families knowledgeable of curricular units and adjustments to instructional practices. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc.  Teacher leaders will facilitate professional development, schedule and facilitate inter visitations and support staff during common planning time and during inquiry meetings. Funding will be set aside to purchase professional development and coaching hours for Mathematics   Classroom teachers will have common planning for two consecutive periods once/week.  Substitute teachers will be hired to cover classes during inter visitations and when teachers are attending professional development. Funding will be set aside for instructional planning at least once/month for all teaching staff to participate in planning for academic rigor   Model and peer collaborative teachers will have one additional prep/week to assist in supporting teachers in their classroom Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X X C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, there will be a 30% growth towards mastery of the bottom 5 standards identified in the June 2018 instructional report. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 38  Action plans, June Instructional Report, Ready (Baseline) , Standards Based Snapshot Assessments Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 39  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). (aligned with Rise Key 2) Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. (aligned with Rise Key 6) 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. (aligned with Rise Key 1) 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). (aligned with Rise Keys 4 and 5) X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Our strengths include using resources and making organizational decisions that are aligned to and support our vision, mission and instructional goals. We will continue to budget for teacher leaders and a literacy coach to support teachers in all academic areas. We have also been accepted in to the Algebra for All program which will strengthen our practices in Mathematics. The prep schedule will allow for all teachers to have common planning time for a two consecutive periods. In addition, we will also participate in inquiry work on Tuesday evenings twice/month using the data wise protocol for inquiry. The Instructional cabinet will meet bi-monthly and be comprised of teachers from a variety of grades and support staff. The cabinet will continually analyze data, create action plans, facilitate professional development based on findings and reassess for impact. Our areas of need are teacher pedagogical practices in the areas of Using Questioning & Discussion techniques, assessment in instruction, and enhancement of student vocabulary. School leaders will continue to provide support for the aforementioned areas through professional development opportunities, inter-visitation, modeling and feedback from both administrators and teacher leaders. Administrators will use also use TeachBoost to assist in supporting teachers and providing consistent and timely feedback. The data trends and sources that were analyzed include but are not limited to The NYC School Quality Guide, Advance, results from iReady diagnostics, and Principal Performance Review. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 40  Part 2 – Summative Vision for Effective School Leadership What is your vision for effective school leadership at your school? The vision for effective school leadership is to provide support and structures to strengthen teacher pedagogy aligned to CCLS and school beliefs that are informed by the Danielson Framework for Teaching in order to meet the needs of all learners. What are your core belief(s) for school improvement and how they inform your vision for developing instructional leadership at your school? Our core beliefs for school improvement is that teacher knowledge of the CCLS and Social Studies and Science Scope and Sequence will assist staff in fostering a strong content knowledge base which would guide their development for improving overall pedagogical practices. As a result teachers will take ownership of their learning and practice, resulting in fostering student independence and high academic achievement. What is your vision for developing differentiated leadership throughout your school? How will you utilize teacher leaders to build broad capacity within your school? The vision for developing differentiated leadership throughout the school is to implement an instructional cabinet that is inclusive of all teachers from a variety of grade levels and educators of each sub group. We will also continue to have utilize teacher leaders to support all staff in refining pedagogical practices in all subject areas. Each teacher leader will participate in cycles of inquiry, facilitate professional development and inter visitations, model best practices and provide timely and actionable feedback. How will the leader foster collaborative school governance processes, and ensure full family participation together with other stakeholders? In collaboration with our CBO ,Partnership with Children, and Parent Teacher Association (PTA), school leaders will plan, and execute school governance process that is aligned to the schools vision. We will meet monthly to discuss the implementation process and make adjustments as needed. All stakeholders will be informed of decisions in writing, at PTA meetings or other school functions and/or through phone blasts. How will you use evidence-based systems to ensure school and teacher leaders are led by a cycle of continuous learning and use this to inform their teams’ priorities? Evidence-Based System Support(s) Collaborator(s) ADVANCE District Office, BFSC School Leaders, Teacher Leaders Periodic Assessment BFSC Instructional Cabinet, MOSL Committee Part 3 – Annual Goal 2018-19 CEP-RISE 41  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By June 2019, 50% of teachers will improve upon their practice in Questioning and Discussion Techniques, Student Engagement and Using Assessment in Instruction through targeted professional development as measured by a one point increase in Advance. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal? Average Math Proficiency Average ELA Proficiency Effective School Leadership Collaborative Teachers 2018-19 CEP-RISE 42  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Based on End of Year conferences, Professional Development schedule will be developed and PD will focus on building capacity for Questioning and Discussion techniques, building student vocabulary , rigorous instruction, data collection & analysis and utilizing data to plan next steps based on impact to student learning Administrators will provide target and actionable feedback to teachers within 48 hours of observation Data Wise meetings will focus on the analysis and use of administered assessments measured against a common rubric and/or CCLS. Inter-visitations will be scheduled to allow Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) End of Year Conferences Teachers in all subject areas Collaborative Teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 Principal, Average proficiency ELA and Math Assistant Principal, Teacher Leaders, Literacy Coach Advance Data Teachers in all subject areas Effective School Leadership September 2018 - May 2019 Principal Advance Data Assistant Principal Average proficiency ELA and Math Collaborative Teachers Effective School Leadership Effective School Leadership Teachers in all subject areas Teachers in all subject areas September 2018 - June 2019 October 2018- May 2019 Principal, Lesson plans Assistant Principal, Teacher Leaders Principal, Agenda and minutes from inquiry team meetings Feedback forms Assistant Principal, Teacher Leaders 2018-19 CEP-RISE 43  teachers to visit other colleagues who are modeling best practices as measured by the Danielson’s Framework. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement Advance Data Minutes from debriefing sessions How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. P.S. 67 will engage parents through monthly parent workshops, distribute monthly calendars and newsletters, share information and strategies on Class Dojo and invite parents to participate in Academic Parent Teacher Teams (APPT). The parent coordinator will chair the APTT committee, create and distribute monthly school wide calendars and newsletters and schedule monthly parent workshops. Teachers and teacher leaders will facilitate parent workshops. All teachers will create class newsletters for the purpose of keeping families informed of the content being covered on a monthly basis. CBO will assist all staff in engaging parents in workshops and informing them of opportunities for parent engagement. In addition, CBO will create, distribute and analyze parent surveys to keep abreast of parent involvement in both academic and family based activities. Administrators will be responsible for monitoring the distribution of materials, posts to Class Dojo, parent workshops and the facilitation of APTT. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. To achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan I will: create a prep schedule which allows teacher leaders to meet with teachers during common planning time create a prep schedule which allows teachers to plan and analyze data for two consecutive periods  purchase Teach Boost to assist in tracking observations and feedback from administrators and teacher leaders    meet with instructional cabinet to create a professional development plan aligned with school vision   utilize support and professional development from the Borough Field Support Center, District Office, Office of review and approve monthly calendars and newsletters Student Support and Office of Community schools set aside funding for instructional cabinet to meet after school and purchase items to support action plans   hire substitute teachers to support instruction while teachers are at training or participating in an inter visitation 2018-19 CEP-RISE 44   one 5th grade teacher will participate in Algebra for All and support his colleagues in the implementation of best practices in Math instruction Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X X C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, 50% of teachers will improve upon their practice in Questioning and Discussion Techniques, Student Engagement and Using Assessment in Instruction through targeted professional development as measured by 2 tenths of a point increase in Advance. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance, Surveys Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 45  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. (aligned with Rise Key 2) 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. (aligned with Rise Key 4 and 6) 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. (aligned with Rise Key 5) 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. (aligned with Rise Key 3) x x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? The Charles A. Dorsey school has made it a priority to work alongside parents to assist with improvement in academic and socio-emotional growth. This year based on The Framework for Great Schools Report, 96% of parents and teachers believe that the outreach to parents improved in the 2015 - 2016 academic school year. Parents receive monthly newsletters and a calendar from teachers and the parent coordinator. We have a monthly community meetings in which both parents and students are honored and we celebrate scholars who have exemplified the value for the month. PWC facilitates weekly meetings or classes with both parents and scholars during and after school. The school, in collaboration with PWC, organizes family trips to build a sense of community as well as give families and staff the opportunity to enjoy experiences that they may otherwise not have the opportunity to participate in. The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strengths and needs are identified and used to augment learning. For the 2017 - 2018 school year, improvements in parent engagement will be made such as, more off site trips to increase parent bonding and give them ways to communicate with other parents in their community. The parent coordinator and CBO director will conduct surveys quarterly, to track progress, satisfaction, and to collect feedback to make adjustments to workshops and programs offered. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 46  The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. P.S. 67 will provide training for College and Career readiness, adult classes (ESL & TASC), a parent research center, health and fitness activities, and counseling services (for both students and parents) both in-house and outsourced. With the use of Class Dojo, parents will be able to track student progress in real-time. Having data readily accessible to parents will encourage dialogue amongst parents, students, and school community members. Dialogue will be centered on student learning and success and encourage and empower families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. Parents have the option of being a classroom support to teachers, organizing class libraries, being a helpful eye on the playground, and managing the student cafeteria. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Strong Family and Community Ties What is your vision for strong family and community ties at your school? What opportunities exist for the school staff to know the students and their families in order to better communicate and partner with families and communities in the vision for the school? The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic, social and emotional developmental, health) to support student success. Within the Community School model, how will families be welcomed into the school and made a part of the school community? What support will administrators, teachers, school staff and school safety officers be given to help create a welcoming environment? Will there be a dedicated space for families in the school? The family room which hosts the office of the Community School Director and Parent Coordinator is the nexus of parent activity at the school. In collaboration with the principal teachers and staff, parents are invited to the school to participate in a variety of workshops and activities to foster collaboration between school and families geared towards academic and social emotional growth. Workshops take place monthly and cover topics from testing anxiety, to smart routine building to parent struggles and common core standards. How will the school identify and develop families to take leadership roles in school decision making/school governance structures? Families are encouraged to attend Parent Teacher Association, School Leadership Team and Community Meetings. The parent coordinator also sends home school surveys and questionnaires to get feedback from families to give us data to assess the needs and wants of the school community. How will the school engage the community and families? How will they ensure that teachers are able to learn from families about the children being taught? PWC in collaboration with the staff and other community based organizations facilitate bi-weekly parent meetings and workshops. Teacher will use their Tuesday parent engagement time and preparation periods to reach out to families. Monthly newsletters are sent home to inform families of the goals and objectives of each subject area as well as highlight scholars doing well in school. We will also send home two progress reports so that families are aware of student progress outside of the regularly scheduled report cards. Three times per year the classes chosen to participate in the APTT will meet to discuss student 2018-19 CEP-RISE 47  data and collaborate with teachers and other family members on strategies that can be used to improve academic achievement. How do families partner with the school and CBO to support student success? Will there be dedicated space for families? Family partnerships with school: Parent Teacher Association Family partnerships with CBO: Community School Team, Learning Leaders, Parent Teacher Learning Team, Cumberland Hospital Is there dedicated space for these partnerships? Parent Room - Room 111 What data and student progress feedback loops will be present at the school to ensure that families knowledgeable of their children’s scholastic success, in addition to report cards? The school will use Class Dojo school wide to keep parents informed of daily updates and student progress. PWC will continue their weekly meetings, teachers will facilitate Literacy and Math night a minimum of twice per year, progress reports will be sent home twice per year to keep families informed of student progress in between report cards. Families participating in PTT will have two meetings over the course of the year to analyze data and set S.M.A.R.T goals. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By January 2019, there will be a 10% increase in parent involvement in school activities as measured by sign in sheets. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal? Collaborative Teachers Effective School Leadership Average ELA proficiency Average Math proficiency 2018-19 CEP-RISE 48  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Parent Coordinator and CBO staff will survey parents in order to determine if workshops are meeting their needs. Family activities and workshops will be built into the monthly calendar and facilitated by various members of the school community. Parent Engagement Tuesday Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Parents Parent Engagement Sept. Parent Coordinator, survey results 2018- June 2019 CBO director Parents Parent Engagement Sept. Parent coordinator Sign in sheets Student Attendance 2018- June 2019 Parents Parent Engagement Sept. ELA and Math Proficiency 2018 - June 2019 Administration, Teachers, Parent coordinator, CBO director, Attendance Teacher, Guidance Counselor Daily Attendance Sheets Family feedback Parent surveys Sign in sheets Data Parent Teacher Teams Families of scholars in grades 1 , 2, 3 & 4 Parent Engagement October. 2018 - May 2019 Principal, Parent Coordinator, Literacy Coach, 1st, 2nd and 3rd grade teacher Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP-RISE 49  Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. The school and PWC will set aside funding for the Learning Leaders program, supplies for workshops and meetings. School staff and families will facilitate some meetings and workshops. Monthly calendars , notices and robo calls will help keep parents advised of upcoming workshops and programs. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title I 1003(a) Title III X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X X C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By January 2019, 70% of parents who complete the survey will indicate that they have participated in a school function, activity or workshop. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Family surveys, sign in sheets student data from APTT. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 50  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environments, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Goals for ELT should aligned to the Rise Benchmarks. How will the school will ensure that all students’ individual needs are served during the Rise ELT and how the school’s vision for ELT will impact both academic achievement and social emotional growth? Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019 100% of students in grades K-5 will participate in ELT one hour and 15minutes per day 4 days per week. ELT will be co-led by LEAP, Partnership With Children, and classroom teachers. During ELT scholars will participate in small group instruction, accountable talk, rotating choice based enrichment activities and small therapeutic groups. Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? Voluntary X Compulsory Rise ELT – Describe what accountability structures the school will employ to ensure participation of all students, including special populations, will participate fully in Rise ELT. Additional ELT - If there is a voluntary ELT program in addition to the compulsory Rise ELT, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. Expanded Learning Time (ELT) is a compulsory part of the school day. All scholars will be offered choice based electives on a rotating schedule once per week the other three days will be teachers will facilitate small group instruction, targeted intervention and need based pull outs. Part 3 – ELT Program Description Target Population: The ELT program for a Rise School will be offered to all students in the school. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program: How will the school integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging? How will CBO staff and the school’s teachers be integrated to provide a seamless learning day?  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduces risk for retention or drop out, and increases the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  What new content areas and opportunities will be offered to students? How will the school ensure all IEP and language mandates are met during ELT? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 51   Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  How will community educators receive professional development? Are there plans to provide joint PD to school faculty and community partner staff?  What content will be led by pedagogical staff and what content will be led by CBO partners?  How will the school best utilize CBO partners to impact student achievement?  How will effective outreach be conducted to families?  How will programming be made easily accessible to students and families in order to encourage participation? The hour will offer a combination of targeted instruction and weekly choice based enrichment. Scholars will be offered a rotating list of enrichment opportunities led by LEAP after school staff and will be divided according to interest into age appropriate high interest activities designed to appeal to a range of interests and abilities. Activities offered will allow scholars to build on academic skills while expanding the range of experiences available in the school day to art, music, drama sports and yoga. These activities will be led by CBO staff with support of classroom teachers. During the ELT hour Partnership with Children will also offer therapeutic groups including arts therapy and bereavement group. In addition to weekly choice time teachers will also use ELT to offer smaller group instruction, targeted intervention and utilize iReady and MyOn digital learning platforms. Families will be informed of ELT offerings VIA the community school newsletter and will be invited to share in culminating activities at the end of each rotating cycle. Participation will be mandatory, however the element of student voice and choice will ensure that participation is also enthusiastic. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. How will the school assess the impact of ELT on individual student achievement and social emotional development? 2. 3. ELT will be jointly supervised by the school principal and Community School director. Principal Jackson will assure that targeted intervention and teacher led instruction is meeting student academic needs. Tal Bar-Zemer, Community school Director will work with LEAP director Taj Bey to assure that enrichment activities are consistent, high interest, support student social emotional and academic skills and are executed with full fidelity to the LEAP after school model as an extension of the afterschool program. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. July/August 2018 - program planning and staffing. First semester calendar created and distributed. September 2018 - Enrichment selections offered to students and class assignments created October 2018 - First ELT cycle begins December 2018 - ELT cycle culminating activities January 2019 - New ELT cycle begins, students select activities and assignments made March 2019 - ELT cycle 2 culminating activities. New ELT cycle begins, students select activities and assignments made 2018-19 CEP-RISE 52  June 2019 - ELT cycle 3 culminating activities. Final assessment and observations. Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. Classroom teachers will have small group instruction and LEAP after school program will provide enrichment opportunities. Some resources that will be used for ELT will include, Ready NY, IReady, teacher created materials and materials for enrichment programming. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. X X 21st Century Title I 1003(a) X Tax Levy X Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA SIG Grant P/F Set-aside School Achievement Funding X X C4E Other Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By December all scholars will have participated in one full cycle. By the end of cycle one Tal Bar-Zemer and Taj Bey will have completed the first round of NYSAN program quality assessment rubric measuring indicators for program effectiveness. This is the same tool used to measure program quality during the afterschool hours. The tool rates indicators of environment and climate, administration and organization, relationships, staffing, materials, youth participation and engagement, and linkages between school day and after school. Full program observation protocol will be undertaken each program cycle and necessary improvements will be implemented before the start of each cycle. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. NYSAN program quality assessment tool. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 53  Section 7: Community School Description Directions: The Community School strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – The Community School Program Goal(s) How is the Community School strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? The Community school team will work collaboratively with school staff to ensure that wraparound resources and services are provided in the school day and beyond to meet the needs of students and families in order to support increased learning, health and well-being in the community. The community school director maintains relationships with multiple community organizations and stakeholders. These include Cumberland Hospital, BAM, Brooklyn Community Church, Ingersol Community Center and the local police precinct. In addition the community school program maintains arts and youth development centered enrichment activities that increase student engagement and attachment to school throughout the day. The social work team supports social emotional skills and provides interventions needed to address barriers to learning such as emotional regulation, behavioral problems, anxiety and depression. The team supports school climate by offering class push ins and school wide events and activities to have broad and inclusive celebrations and build school culture. The Community School Director spearheads attendance improvement efforts. The Community School Director monitors attendance data on student sorter and leads the attendance team in attendance interventions including monthly attendance celebrations, attendance incentives, attendance mentoring, and student/family outreach. In addition the Director also spearheads monthly community school team meetings to carry out the community school action plan. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. The Community school team will work collaboratively with school staff to ensure that wraparound resources and services are provided in the school day and beyond to meet the needs of students and families in order to support increased learning, health and well-being in the community. The community school director maintains relationships with multiple community organizations and stakeholders. These include Cumberland Hospital, BAM, Brooklyn Community Church, Ingersol Community Center and the local police precinct. In addition the community school program maintains arts and youth development centered enrichment activities that increase student engagement and attachment to school throughout the day. The social work team supports social emotional skills and provides interventions needed to address barriers to learning such as emotional regulation, behavioral problems, anxiety and depression. The team supports school climate by offering class push ins and school wide events and activities to have broad and inclusive celebrations and build school culture. The Community School Director spearheads attendance improvement efforts. The Community School Director monitors attendance data on student sorter and leads the attendance team in attendance interventions including monthly attendance celebrations, attendance incentives, attendance mentoring, and student/family outreach. In addition the Director also spearheads monthly community school team meetings to carry out the community school action plan. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 54  Please answer the following question as it relates to meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? Achieving our Community School Goals will provide all students with rigorous instruction, enrichment activities and a supportive learning environment which will set the stage for academic excellence in all areas. In addition, the supports in Health and Wellness will empower all staff, students and families to have the drive and motivation to do their best throughout the school year. Part 2 – Community School Program Description Part 2a. Identify the CBO partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service LEAP all students Brooklyn Academy of Music all students Cumberland Health Center students with asthma and other chronic health problems Good Shepherd Services students with special needs/ behavioral problems provide after school enrichment programming to support families and students enrichment activities supporting social studies curriculum channel families to low cost/free preventive care with support navigating insurance system. offer home based resources and support for developing parenting skills. Part 2b. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 55  The Principal and Assistant Principal will meet weekly with the Community School Director to coordinate and assist in the delivery of state of the art professional development services to enhance what teachers and para-professionals are already doing and to analyze data to track trends and improve upon successes. Highly qualified, experienced and interpersonal personnel will allow for practical and useful information sharing that will be immediately turn keyed to teachers in the regular day programs. Programming will be driven by data collected and analyzed to assess student needs. It will also include in school programming as well as parent education and whole family programs. Programming decisions will be based on ongoing needs assessments from families, staff and teachers and will be geared towards creating long lasting, well supported and integrated support structures for children and their families. Part 3 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 3a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students The administration, full time LCSW’s, CBO director, PTA president, Parent Coordinator, and teachers will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the Community School program. ELT time will be coordinated according to the needs of individual classes with time for extra instruction, enrichment and social emotional support. The program will be evaluated based on parent surveys, annual goal setting, ATS and OORS statistics, and periodic academic assessments. Part 3b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. Social workers, fitness/wellness trainers, community coordinators, health and mental health directors, teachers, paraprofessionals, school leaders, per-session and per diem funding (Renewal School funding) will all be needed to implement the program. The ELT will be added to the conclusion of each school day. Part 3c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. . The implementation date for children will begin September 5th , 2018 and the end date will be June 26, 2019. Part 3d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this R-CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 56  Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Student assessments such as running records, miscue analysis, on-demand writing, I-Ready, Ready and results of periodic assessments are reviewed and analyzed to determine ELA intervention services required to ensure students who are not performing at proficiency levels receive AIS in a timely and effective manner. Criteria for identifying students to receive academic intervention services in Mathematics is determined by reviewing end of unit assessment results, exit slips, iReadyand Ready assessments Criteria for identifying students to receive academic intervention services in Science is determined by reviewing end of unit assessment results, Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) ELA Academic Intervention Services are provided during small group instruction with guided reading programs: Leveled Literacy Intervention Grades K-5, FundationsGrades K - 2 Students will also have 45 minutes of iReadyELA. Students receive intervention through iReady Math 45 minutes per week. In addition, students will work in small groups for targeted instruction. Science academic intervention services are provided to students during small group instruction guided by classroom teacher using materials and Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) ELA academic intervention services are provided online, one-to-one and during small group instruction such as guided reading and writing groups Mathematics intervention services are provided one-to-one and in small groups when teachers provide differentiated instruction during Mathematics instructional block. Science intervention services are provided one-to-one and in small groups when teachers provide differentiated When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) A teacher or educational assistants pushes-in either once or twice per week and provides additional guided instruction to small groups. In addition, specialists have scheduled time periods to provide literacy instruction with the program Leveled Literacy Intervention to small groups in Kindergarten-Grade 5. Intervention services are provided online, during one-to-one conferences and small group instruction Intervention services are provided during conferences and small group instruction. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 57 Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) exit slips, project comments, etc. Criteria for identifying students to receive academic intervention services in Social Studies is determined by reviewing end of unit assessment results, exit slips, project comments, etc. Criteria for determining At-risk services are teacher/administration referrals, crisis or emergency support, additional socialization or transition support identified, mediation and conflict resolution support identified. resources provided by FOSS and Fusion instructional resources. Social Studies academic intervention services are provided to students during small group instruction guided by classroom teacher using instructional materials and resources (e.g., multi-media, web-sites, text, etc.) that support concept and/or themes One-to-one and small group guidance and counseling sessions instruction during science Social Studies academic intervention services are provided to students during small group instruction guided by classroom teacher using instructional materials and resources (e.g., multi-media, web-sites, text, etc.) that support concept and/or themes One-to-one and small group guidance and counseling sessions. Brooklyn Center for Psychotherapy Intervention services are provided during conferences and small group instruction Group guidance and counseling sessions are scheduled once a week or as needed 2018-19 CEP-RISE 58  Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We currently have 31 students in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We are planning to provide intensive outreach, academic intervention services and supportive social and emotional services to students and parents. We will also conduct home visits and hold workshops and meetings at the school with Community Based Organizations such as Cumberland Hospital to support families with preventative services. Students in temporary housing will have first preference for our food pantry which is funded by Food Bank Of NYC. In addition, backpacks and school materials will be provided in September and December to ensure they are equipped to be successful throughout the school year. Our school counselor will also provide services to all students in temporary housing. This will take place during both individual and group counseling sessions. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 59  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP-RISE 60  Section 10: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. To recruit highly qualified staff, we will consult with former network affiliates, consultants and staff for referrals of teachers that hold the appropriate license for the vacancy. For teachers that are not highly qualified, we will offer support (e.g., opportunities to enroll in coursework, funding sources, etc.) for him/her to fulfill the requirements for the license area, In order to retain our highly qualified teachers, we will offer ongoing professional development to move their teaching practice and offer opportunities for teacher leadership meetings (e.g., grade leaders, planning and facilitating professional development sessions, family workshops, etc. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). All teachers, administration, paraprofessionals and staff are afforded the opportunity to attend professional development in their specialized areas, as well as, areas where they need improvement. Professional Development will be provided for all teachers in the areas of Mathematics and Literacy. In addition to the professional development provided, our teachers will be supported by model and peer collaborative teachers as well as the Literacy Coach. They will also have the opportunity to collaborate with grade colleagues during their common preparation periods. New teachers will be supported by an in-house mentor and they will meet a minimum of two periods per week (during school and after-school). Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 2018-19 CEP-RISE 61  Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). Pre-Kindergarten teachers will align their curriculum to the CCLS. In addition, they will collaborate and work closely with Kindergarten teachers when planning units and modules. Our Pre-K staff (teachers and paraprofessionals) will participate in all school-wide professional development sessions and school-wide events. Grade meetings will be conducted to analyze student data and identify additional supports to address student needs. Monthly workshops on Early Childhood development and related topics will be offered to ensure parental engagement activities are maintained and that parents are informed on Early Childhood program events. Pre-K students will visit Kindergarten classes to become acquainted with the Kindergarten procedures. School counselors and social workers will facilitate parent workshops on transitioning children back to to school. The school will organize a Back to School BBQ to give students the opportunity to meet their teachers and classmates before school starts. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Administrators and teachers will form a team to participate in the Data Wise training program. This team will guide the school in using inquiry to improve the academic achievement of all schools in both ELA and math. The team will attend training and turnkey all information and skills learned to staff. We will also create action plans which include dates to measure progress. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (R-CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section 2018-19 CEP-RISE 62  Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Federal Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 189,237 TBD 0 58,685 0 0 1,759,252 references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X X N/A X N/A N/A X Column B Section Reference(s) 5,6,8,9 N/A N/A 5 N/A N/A 5,6,8 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows: 2018-19 CEP-RISE 63   Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/R-CEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 64  Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current R-CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 13K067, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students P.S. 067 Charles A. Dorsey will support parents and families of Title I students by: ●providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ●providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ●fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ●providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ●sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 65   providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community;  provide metro cards for parents to travel to and from parent workshops and meetings that will empower them to participate in both academic and community forums that will impact their child's achievement. Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ●actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ●support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ●maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ●conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ●provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ●host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); 2018-19 CEP-RISE 66  ●schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ●translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ●conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their students' academic skill needs and what parents can do to help. The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ●holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ●hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ●encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ●supporting or hosting Family Day events; ●establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ●encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ●providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ●developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ●providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) 13K067, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 67  ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● ensuring information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 68  ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 69  ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by promptly reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 70  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 13 School Name The Charles A. Dorsey Borough Brooklyn School Number 067 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Kyesha Jackson Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Michelle Morris Foster Teacher/Subject Area T. Robinson Marcano/SETTS Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Superintendent Barbara Freeman Assistant Principal Ozella Winston-Prosper Coach N/A School Counselor Amanda Davis Parent type here Parent Coordinator Field Support Center Staff Member Camilla Holmes Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 1 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP-RISE 71  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 218 Total number of ELLs 35 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 16.06% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Yes NoFreestanding ENL Yes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Mandarin Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown Program TBE TBE TBE DL Lang. Mandarin School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2017-2018 K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 x 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? P.S. 67 uses NYS Performance Tasks as a baseline assessment, running records, TCRWP and IReady baseline assessments to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs. These assessments evaluate students' skill levels in phonemic awareness, sight words, vocabulary and reading levels.This data will be used to help inform our schools instructional plan by providing information about students instructional levels and independent reading level to guide differentiated instruction and set goals. Based on the data 62% of our ELLs are preforming below standards. We will use this information to provide additional supports through Fundations, Fountas and Pinnell (LLI) and IReady. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 72  ELLs at P.S, 67 will receive both push in and pull out services from ENL teacher along with AIS and RTI services as needed for those students who are not meeting standards and require additional academic supports in both ELA and Math. Students will also receive additional supports in after-school and Saturday Academy settings to reinforce what was taught during the school day as well as preparing them for NYSESLAT testing. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our ENL program for ELL's through information from assessment data from ELL Periodic Assessment, iReady. and NYSITELL, data will also be used. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The instructional cabinet at P.S. 67 meets regularly to analyze and address problems of practice and make adjustments for students and programming as needed. Once the areas that need further support are identified, ENL and classroom teachers along with other support staff will collaborate to provide targeted and differentiated instructional opportunities. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The school uses data from assessments to guide instruction for ELL's in grades K-5 within the RTI framework. Students receive additional support in language and literacy development and data is collected to determine if students are benefiting from the instructional program. Students who do not demonstrate improvement are provided with other instructional models, and or other leveled tiers of support. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. NYSITELL and NYSESLAT data reveals that beginner and intermediate ELL's are consistently scoring below standards in reading and writing, while there has been some gains in listening and speaking. The results of the data are analyzed to determine if students are making significant progress in areas of deficiency and at what percentage rate. This information is used to further inform instruction, make adjustments to curriculum and lesson plans and to guide conferences with ELL's. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Our instructional team along with the ENL teacher and principal reviews data to determine what adjustments are needed in order to increase achievement for ELLs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. P.S. 67 offers a freestanding ENL program for ELLS in grades K - 5. Instruction is delivered in English, with native language support using the push in model for our intermediate and advanced level ELLs and pullout for our newcomers and beginners. The program is designed to service students using an ungraded model not to expand 2 grade levels. Student may be grouped heterogeneously taking into consideration the varied degrees of literacy in ELLS first language, the disparity in skills and student needs. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A 2018-19 CEP-RISE 73  c. DL program. If applicable. The dual language program provides instruction for ELLs with half being in English and the other half in the target language. The program will begin with a 50/'50 model progressing to an 80/20 model in the early grades and then moving into a 50/50 model in the upper grades. There is one teacher that provides instruction in both English as well as the target language. Language is taught through content areas as well as through literacy. Students are heterogeneously grouped by grade and travels together as a group. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The ENL teacher ensures that mandated minutes are met in each instructional program. In the ENL Program, English Language Learners (ELLs) from kindergarten to grade five are grouped according to their level of English language proficiency and grade level. Entering (Beginner) and Emerging (Lower Intermediate) ELL’s receive 360 minutes or 2 units of support each week. Transitioning (Intermediate) and Expanding (Advanced) ELLs receive 180 minutes or 1 unit of support each week. Commanding (Proficient) ELLs must continue to receive services for 2 years and the required 90 minutes of instruction each week. Home language arts support is offered through various activities including a multilingual library, bilingual books and our technology program, 'Imagine Learning English', which instructs students in their native language. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Core content at P.S. 67 is delivered through a combination of key literacy domains that include oral language instruction, and developing connections to ELLs community values, identities and home languages. Content area instruction is designed to reinforce lessons and provide support that strengthen skills that are being developed and mastered in the classroom. The ENL teacher works in conjunction with classroom teacher to support and foster critical thinking and language development. Strategies are consistent and appropriate according to ELLs language proficiency in order to promote ELLS engagement in learning tasks that require complex thinking, This approach allows our ELLS to engage in accountable talk, increase their level of participation, develop their cognitive academic language proficiency and build linguistic competence. Scaffolding techniques such as modeling, contextualization, text representation, front loading vocabulary and the development of ELLs metacognitive ability, are used as a bridge for language and content learning to achieve the Common Core Learning Standards. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Ells are offered the opportunity to take exams and other assignments with support of bilingual dictionaries in their native language when appropriate. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Differentiated instructional plans are in place for each of the ELL subgroups. All Ells receive small group instruction, RTI and are required to participate in Extended Learning Time. SIFE students are supported by teaching foundational literacy so students will be able to use text as a resource to learn. In addition, a balanced literacy approach will aid in building academic language skills and conceptual knowledge across content areas. For Newcomers, in addition to supporting their academic growth and language acquisition, we assist in the transition to the American school system and culture. Developing students will continue to receive the support and skill sets that learners need to meet learning standards with such models as SIOP and CALLA. Long term ELLs need language support and will be receive this through vocabulary instruction, alternate reading text and scaffold writing activities. Former Ells may be targeted at-risk by the RTI team and would receive additional services that 2018-19 CEP-RISE 74  include peer support, small group instruction, Tier II or Tier III intervention if deemed necessary. This support will continue for two years after exiting ELL status as per CR Part 154.2 . 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? All ELL-SWDs are serviced according to the goals set forth in their IEP. Depending on the students individual needs, services offered range from Special Education Teacher Support Services (SETSS), speech or full-time placement on a self-contained special education class with ENL services. Instructional strategies include scaffolding techniques such as modeling, front loading for vocabulary development and text representation. Additional supports are also available to all ELL's through the Imagine Learning computer based program. Instruction is differentiated, students are grouped according to their language and academic needs in accordance with their IEP goals. All teachers and educational assistants receive access to IEP's so that they can ensure that each student is receiving the services they are mandated for. At the present time we do not have any ELL students with IEP's that is mandated for bilingual instruction, however, we have systems and a team in place that will address those needs if a student enrolls with those specific needs. The team includes the ENL teacher, assistant principal, SETSS teacher, Psychologist and Guidance Counselor. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school S.I.T. team consisting of the following school personnel teachers, social workers, school psychologists, nurses, speech, occupational and physical therapists meets biweekly to ensure that students receive the required services in the least restrictive environment. Curriculum, instruction, and scheduling will be adjusted, if necessary, to meet the needs of such students. The students' IEP is the guiding document for such a process. Students in regular and special education are not segregated and students with disabilities would be fully integrated into the school community through flexible scheduling. Our goal would be to keep the student in the least restrictive environment and to make this student feel as welcome and comfortable in our school as possible, while meeting their academic needs. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All intervention services are provided in English and the ENL and RTI support personnel collect assessment data from ATS, running records, student portfolio and performance task assessments to monitor student progress and academic growth in each content area. ELL's targeted for intervention may receive tier II, or III intervention. P.S. 67 currently uses Leveled Literacy Intervention (Fountas & Pinnell) along with MyOn for ELA intervention with our ELLs. For Math, Science and Social Studies, we are not currently using a specific or targeted intervention program, however ELLs do receive additional support in these content areas as needed through a collaboration with the ENL teacher and classroom teacher. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? The data shows that many of the ELLs at our school require additional support in developing and strengthening phonics and vocabulary skills. In the upcoming school year we will using Cracking the Code to reinforce early literacy skills with students in grades 3-5 that are struggling at the beginner proficiency level. Words their Way for English Language Learners will also be apart of instructional practices for all ELLs across all proficiency levels. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We are not discontinuing any services at this time. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Expanded Learning Time is mandated for all students. They also receive the same services offered to our non-ELL students including RTI and all other intervention services offered. In addition we will continue to offer additional support and supplemental services for NYESELAT preparation during after school programming. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 75  12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. All teachers of ELLs are encouraged to have a cognates and or picture work wall when appropriate. Teachers use the ELL Language support and auditory small group lessons from GoMath. The MyOn program is also used which allows ELLs to have digital text read aloud. ELLs also have access to Imagine Learning, a computer based program that supports language development with assessment components. All ELLs have access to iPads or Macbooks in their classrooms. Translation programs have been set on the iPad for students to use as needed. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Student's home language is recognized and valued in the ENL model, however they are encouraged and supported to use their emerging and developing English Language skills. In the dual language model, home language support is assessed and monitored through content and literacy instruction. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Mandates are reviewed and implemented on an ongoing basis to ensure that students are receiving all required services, supports and resources that they are entitled to. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). When new ELLs enroll at our school before the beginning of the school year and throughout, Students and their families meet with key staff (when possible) that will work closely with them during and throughout the transitioning process. These school staff may include, an administrator, the ENL Teacher/coordinator, bilingual social worker, parent coordinator and community associate. The "enrollment team" will ensure that each new student and their parents receive all documents and school information as well as provide answers to any questions that they may have. Translation/Interpretation services will be provided as needed in an effort to make each new family feel welcome at our school. Parents will be informed of school culture, services and overall expectations for both themselves and their child. The parent coordinator(with language assistance if necessary) will also inform parents of pertinent information and how to access services. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Not applicable 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Our dual language program follows the self-contained model with 20% integration each instructional day. Core content is taught in Mandarin at 80% and English at 20%. In K and 1, target language instruction occurs on split day cycle early in the school year and then progresses to an alternating day model in grades 2-5. Both languages are taught simultaneously. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 76  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? ENL/Bilingual teachers will attend and participate in a variety of professional development activities throughout the school year and summer. The activities will include but is not limited to district wide, borough wide and citywide workshops/trainings. All pedagogical staff participates in professional development several times a month. The ENL Teacher participates in trainings offered to school staff across all subject areas to stay abreast of changes to the curriculum and grade level benchmarks. The ENL teacher is also supported by workshops through the Department of Educations Office of English Language Learners (OELL). These workshops support the ENL teacher in all facets of instruction from data analysis to designing curriculum. Workshop/training topics include Providing Instructional Support to ELLs with Special Needs, Grant Writing for ELL & Bilingual Programs, CR Part 154, Common Core for ELLs, Title 111 & AMAO Training, ELL teachers will take part in professional development activities given in the building along with other classroom teachers that provide technical and content based support. Some of the professional development activities include Math Common Core Standards, staff meetings, and ELA program training aligned with state standards. Teachers will have the opportunity to gain additional strategies that will support delivering instruction that is Common Core-aligned. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. There is funding allocated for translation services to assist staff in transitioning students to middle school. The translation services assist not only the students, but the families in understanding the application and placement process. In addition, staff is allowed to plan and attend middle school visits to expose students to their options. ENL/ELL teacher will attend professional development opportunities on an ongoing basis throughout the year to meet the minimum 50% requirement. ELL teacher will turnkey several of the PD's to other teachers in the school as well as other PD's as requested by the Principal in order to meet the 15% requirement for all teachers. An agenda and presentation materials will be kept on file according to topic and school year for both on and off site PD's along with staff attendance and feedback forms. Some of the topics to be covered will include Working with ELLs with Special Needs, Translation and Interpretation Services & Procedures, and Instructional Strategies. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs will take place in the late fall to discuss the goals of the program, students progress with proficiency and planned support for further development. The meeting will include th ELL teacher along with other staff needed to inform parents of students development in all areas. Provisions will be in place before hand to accommodate parents that will need interpretation and/or translation. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. ELL parental involvement in our school has been steadily increasing and we are working closely with the Community Schools Director and Community Associate to encourage and include all families in school activities and family initiatives. We send home notices in several native languages that are spoken by ELL students and their families. In addition we are working with outside community based organizations to offer adult ESL/ELL classes here at the school. Our Parent Coordinator, Mr. Graham, assist with translating flyers, conducting outreach to families and helping to organize and facilitate meetings and other activities. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 77  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP-RISE 78 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Kyesha Jackson, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 79  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P.S. 67 School DBN: 13K067 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Kyesha Jackson Title Principal Ozella Winston- Prosper Assistant Principal Darren Graham Parent Coordinator Michelle Morris-Foster ENL/Bilingual Teacher X Parent Tiffanie Marcano/SETTS Teacher/Subject Area X X X Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Amanda Davis School Counselor Barbara Freeman Camilla Holmes Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member 13K Karen Cochrane Other School Psychologist X X Other X Other X Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/29/2017 06/29/2017 06/29/2017 06/29/2017 X 06/29/2017 X X X 06/29/2017 06/29/2017 06/29/2017 06/29/2017 X X 2018-19 CEP-RISE 80  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 13K067 School Name: The Superintendent: Barbara Freeman The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Parents are offerd a Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS), blue cards and lunch forms in their native language and if any of these documents are unavailable in the home language, the Department of Education's Translation and Interpretation Unit is contacted to provide interpretation services. In addition the school utilizes the translation services for translation of parent letters. As a community school we have also identified those staff member who are bilingual and provide additonal support with interpetation and or translation for parents. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 81 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Parents have indicated the following preferred languages for both oral and written communication; English, Spanish, French-Haitian Creole, Bengali, Mandarin, and Arabic 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Parent/ Student handbook Newsletters Monthly Calendars School Announcements (NYS Testing dates, ENL Testing, School Closings 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Formal face-to-face meetings at our school include parent teacher conferences that occur in the fall and spring, parent orientation for parents of ELLs which occurs in the fall, IEP interpretation service(s)? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 82  meetings as mandated, and parent engagement which is offered every Tuesday. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We will provide parents who require language assistance services with a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibiities. There will also be a sign posted near the main entrance indicating the languages of translation. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Feedback is typically gathered from parents through parent surveys, PTA, Community Schools monthly meetings as well as informal meetings. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 83 
