 18K068 School Name: I.S. 068 ISAAC BILDERSEE Principal: MERVE WILLIAMS   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Isaac Bildersee 331800010068 6, 7, 8 School Number (DBN): 18K068 956 East 82 nd Street, Brooklyn NY 11236 718-241-4800 718-241-5582 Phone Number: Fax: Raylene Charles rcharles@is68.org Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Merve Williams Joseph Surpris LaSeon Douglas Reginald Simeon Andrea Rose N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 18 Beverly A. Wilkins Superintendent: 1106 East 95 th Street, Brooklyn NY 11236 Superintendent’s Office Address: Bwilkin@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-566-6059 Phone Number: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   South Brooklyn Field Support Center FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Mauricière de Govia Executive Director: 415 East 89 th Street, Brooklyn NY 11209 mdegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-759-3952 Phone Number: N/A Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Merve Williams Jason Carter LaSeon Douglas Andrea Rose Terri Collins Jennifer Anderson Sharon Burns *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Shamicka Moore Ryan Wheeler Seanelle Leesang Karen Blake Joseph Surpris Member/Parent Member/ Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ Teacher-Chairperson Member/ Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview Our mission at IS 68 Isaac Bildersee is to foster intellectual growth and diverse learning experiences through a rigorous curriculum that fosters conceptual learning and critical thinking for all students. Diverse learning experiences will be provided by collaboratively developing school wide initiative with teachers, parents, community organizations   and local politicians. A multicultural approach to learning will be employed by designing lessons and activities based on students’ heritage, beliefs and prior experiences. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Isaac Bildersee is a community middle school located in Canarsie, Brooklyn, serving students in grades six to eight. Our population includes a large number of students from the West Indies, primarily Haiti as well as a growing population of students from the middle east. The “7Habits of Highly Effective People,” by Stephen Covey is the foundation of our social development and student leadership program. Through the 7 Habits, we nurture the inherent abilities of our students in preparation for college, a career and life. We are a unique school which focuses on the importance of teacher/staff collaboration in providing support to our students. Our staff members are programmed to meet by department, grade and academy regularly to collectively plan for the achievement of our students. Using the “Lesson Study Model,” teachers plan their lessons together, observe each others practices and provide critical feedback to one another. Our leadership philosophy also supports building capacity and growing leadership within the building. We currently have two Peer Collaborative Teachers (PCT’s) who lead our instructional initiatives with the vision and guidance of the Principal and Assistant Principal. This philosophy has produced a growing number of school leaders spawned at IS 68 throughout the district and the city. We have partnered with a number of organizations and introduced a number of initiatives over the past few years to provide additional support and academic interventions and enrichment to our students. They include: FranklinCovey – “The Leader in Me,” is a staff and student leadership model driven by the “7Habits of Highly Effective People,” designed to provide effective life skills and prepare students for their future’s. Billion Oyster Project – Through our partnership with the Billion Oyster Project our students have had the opportunity to become more conscious of their environment and gain a sense of responsibility as it relates to nature. Eco-Schools- Our students are planting the seed to create a sustainable environment through our partnership with Eco-Schools. Starting with a pollinating garden which is growing in the front of our school, we plan to expand the amount of plant life dependent wildlife in Canarsie. Dual Language Program – We are offering a dual-language program to incoming sixth grade students for the first time. Through a grant funded by central, students will have the opportunity to become bi-literate and master two languages. English and Haitian-creole will be offered in the first year. French will be introduced by year three of the grant. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We host a range of students with special needs, from students requiring smaller class sizes as mandated by their Individualized Instructional Plans (IEP), to students receiving English as a New Language Services (ENL). 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Based on the Framework for Great Schools, we have identified the following areas of strength and areas in need of improvement: 0  Strengths According to our quality review data from the 2017-2018 school year, we made the most progress in the area of "collaborative teachers." Areas in Need of Improvement Based on our learning environment survey our area of focus is in the areas of "supportive environment." We identified a need to proving additional support in the area of students feeling safe. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 18K068 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 339 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 57 58 10 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 59 59 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 82.0% % Attendance Rate 77.0% % Reduced Lunch 21.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 0.6% 7.1% 6.2% % Black or African American % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 8.39 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 19.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 44 41 91.7% 4.4% 28.3% 83.2% 2.7% 0.9% 2 26% 7.9 17.0% 20% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on our school's ratings for teacher effectiveness, Measures of Student Learning (MOSL) and the administrative performance review, all categories are rated as effective or higher. The following summary indicates our strengths and needs: Strengths Curriculum maps across all content areas, including the arts, reflect both Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) and citywide instructional shifts as evidenced in clearly articulated learning objectives, essential questions, cross curriculum connections, complex academic vocabulary, thoughtful activities, and varied assessments. Coherent and robust curricular stimulate productive progressions of learning that develop independence and responsibility among diverse groups of learners. The principal makes smart use of the school’s budget to support instructional goals aimed at increased academic achievement. Therefore, organizational decisions anchored in forward thinking about how best to allocate funds to improve the delivery of instruction result in meaningful student work products. Needs Although we have created and adopted a system of daily student performance assessments, we are still working to streamline and institutionalized the system. Although we have grown in our use of formative assessments to drive goal setting and lesson planning, we are still in need of an overall, comprehensive system in which student performance data can be compiled and tracked. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 3  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will administer three uniform assessments per subject, which will drive curriculum adjustments, identify learning targets for students and develop re-teach materials. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Coaches and teachers will meet in the summer of 2018 to commence curriculum mapping and develop/modify a baseline/diagnostic exam which students will take in September. Teacher will receive summer PD through A4A and MSQI. District PD will be received in creating/following a uniform curriculum map and administering a system of periodic assessments throughout the year. We will receive PD in the use and implementation of the "Data Teams" protocol which is an inquiry based model of examining student work. Ongoing on-site professional development will be implemented. The 'Lesson Study Model" will be used as a framework to facilitate collaborative planning and assess students performance and growth. Our Special Education Implementation Team (SIT) will provide monthly PD to staff regarding implementing effective strategies of meeting the needs of our students with disabilities. Our ESL coordinator will provide embedded support to staff in effective strategies of engaging and providing instruction to ENL students on an ongoing basis. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Coaches/Teachers. August/September Principal 2018 Math/ELA teachers, September 2018-June 2019 Principal general education, special education and ENL. Coaches/Teachers September 2018-Principal June 2019 Coaches/Teachers July 2018-June Principal/SIT Team 2019 How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will host a number of parent workshops beginning in September and each month thereafter. Our Parent Coordinator and Guidance Counselors will facilitate the workshops. We will host a meeting that will inform the parents of the new High School application process. We will also host a number of engaging events such as a bingo night and yoga in order to involve parents. To equip parents with the tools they need to support their children, we will host a number of content specific workshops where parents are engaged in CCLS Math, Science, ELA, and Social Studies. 5  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session planning hours: 8 teachers X 10 hours each = 80 hours x 48.90 (Per session rate) = $3,912 Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 we will have completed two of the uniform assessments, analyzed and synthesized the data, and administered the necessary re-teach materials. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) We will review the results of our comprehensive data system against data compiled from ongoing classroom assessments along with MOSL assessments to triangulate the accuracy of the data systems. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based on data from our learning environment survey, we have identified a need to adopt a strategy based on restorative practices. Although we have had an overall decrease in suspensions and high level infractions over the past year, we are working to improve our students perception of safety while at school. Strengths We have had a steady decrease in high level infractions based. We have also had a steady decrease in low level infractions based on 2017-2018 OORS data. Principal and Superintendent Suspensions are down also according to OORS data. Deans referrals have also been reduced. Needs Our students indicated that they sometimes feel unsafe due to negative interactions with other students. Some students feel like the teachers do not always take the time needed to address their needs. . Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 7  By June 2019 we will reduce the number of high level occurrences by 5% as measured by the Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS). 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). We will expand our “Leader In Me” initiative to include lesson supporting the “7 Habits of Habits of Highly Effective People” throughout the year. We will provide a PD session on re-tooling the 7-Habits. We will hire a college and career readiness counselor to help students build leadership skills and create a path to college. Workshops will be provided Guidance Counselors in college readiness. Restorative Practices PD will be offered through our partnership with the Morning Side organization. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All Staff March 2019 Lighthouse Team Guidance Counselors January/February 2019 Principal Restorative Team Members November 2018, February 2019 Principal How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will host a number of parent workshops beginning in September and each month thereafter. Our Parent Coordinator and Guidance Counselors will facilitate the workshops. We will host a meeting that will inform the parents of the new High School application process. We will also host a number of engaging events such as a bingo night and yoga in order to involve parents. To equip parents with the tools they need to support their children, we will host a number of content specific workshops where parents are engaged in the 7 Habits. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The Leader In Me, "Lighthouse Team" will manage and facilitate all activities related to the LIM initiative. The "7 Habits of Highly Effective People/Teens," will be used as an instructional resource. 9  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 2.5% decrease in high level occurrences as measured by collaborative teacher analysis of online reports. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Monthly reviews of OORS reports will be conducted. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths Curriculum maps are collaboratively written. Maps across all content areas, including the arts, reflect both Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) and citywide instructional shifts as evidenced in clearly articulated learning objectives, essential questions, cross curriculum connections, complex academic vocabulary, thoughtful activities, and varied assessments. Coherent and robust curricular stimulate productive progressions of learning that develop independence and responsibility among diverse groups of learners. Needs Although we have common planning time for teachers to meet, we need to ensure that the time is being used productively and are student centered. Student work products must drive data meeting. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 each teacher will engage in collaborative instructional rounds (Lesson Study) and present a lesson to their colleagues which demonstrates effective practices as evidenced by student work samples. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will work together to create interdisciplinary units around a central idea or theme. (We began this work on Brooklyn-Queens day). Coaches provide ongoing PD and support to teachers in curriculum development and lesson planning. Monthly district PD's will support inquiry work. Peer Instructional teachers and master teachers will provide ongoing embedded support to teams during team meeting. Monday PD time will be used for collaborative unit and lesson planning to support instructional rounds. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Coaches Teachers Admin Coaches Teachers Teachers Coaches June 2018, September 2018 District personnel Principal/Coaches September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Open-house tours of the school will be done monthly to give parents an understanding of collaborative teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent collaborations in order to support their children. Our school Parent Coordinator will host the open-house tours. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 2  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, all students will have completed one interdisciplinary project. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student unit assessment data will be reviewed in assessing progress toward meeting this goal. . Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths The Principal makes smart use of the school’s budget to support instructional goals aimed at increased academic achievement. Therefore, organizational decisions anchored in forward thinking about how best to allocate funds to improve the delivery of instruction result in meaningful student work products. Needs The Principal has identified a need to adjust the timeframes in which instructional feedback is given to teachers through the observation process. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the Principal will complete all required teacher observations as per the Advance system. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Advance PD will be receive through the district's TDEC Principal Principal/TDEC November 2018, February 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be informed of the observation process and how teachers are rated according to Danielson during SLT meetings. They will be made aware of the instructional expectation of teachers and how the Principal facilitates the process through professional development and ongoing support. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 31st 50% of observations will be completed. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 5  The Advance systems data platform will be utilized and reviewed to assess progress toward the goal. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on a diminished level of parent participation at PTA and SLT meetings we have identified a need to enhance our work around partnering with families and community organizations to promote training in all areas. Our strengths and areas of improvement include: Strengths The use of an online grading system which parents can access at any time in order to monitor their child’s performance. ● Curriculum based workshops for parents in understanding CCLS ● Increased number of parent teacher conferences ● Team meetings designed to offer parents to opportunity to meet with teachers weekly. Needs ● Increase partnerships with community organizations and families to promote and provide training across all areas including academic and social and emotional developmental health. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will open a community food pantry and provide affordable produce to community residents. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Vital Brooklyn will provide PD, support and resources to open a produce store. Teachers/Students/Parents September 2018-March 2019 Principal/Vital Brooklyn 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Sesame Flyers, Vital Brooklyn. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By March 2019 we will finalize the plan to launch the produce store in April. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. N/A Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  9  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) MSQI, DRP Mathematics State exam level I Science Social Studies Diagnostic assessment data Unit assessments At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students who display an immediate need for social/emotional intervention. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Close reading, independent reading, guided reading. Math intervention/re-teach Academic intervention Project based learning Therapeutic Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group Small group Small group Small group One-to-one/Small Group When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the day/After school During the day/After school After school In-class targeted instruction During the day/After school 0  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 20 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We provide the purchase of school uniforms, instructional materials (Textbooks, journals), and related resources such as book bags, admissions to special events and senior activities. Academic intervention during school hours and after school is offered two days per week for two hours in Math and ELA. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 1  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. We attract highly qualified teachers to our school through open market, DOE sponsored job fairs, and through the teaching fellows program. We ensure that all teachers meet the city and state requirements for professional certification. We assist teachers in becoming highly qualified by offering tuition reimbursement using Title I HQ funds. We provide ongoing professional development to all of our teachers to meet PD mandates. Our teachers are strategically assigned by area of expertise in order to ensure all students are receiving instructions from a teacher who is highly qualified in the content area. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Teachers and Para-professionals receive ongoing professional development in the following ways: 1. Weekly targeted school-wide and individual professional development for eighty minutes every Monday 2. Weekly content area professional development, two periods per week 3. New teacher mentor PD, eight period per month 4. BFSC/District PD, TBD Teachers also receive professional development through the Advance observations process with school administrators as per their individual advance selection. School administrators attend advance training during the summer and receive support through central on an as needed basis. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources 3  Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. A team of staff members who represent all stakeholders review the assessment options each year with staff and make recommendations to the Principal. The Principal makes a final decision and notifies the team. Structures include weekly meetings held with teachers and coaches where data is reviewed, weekly meetings with the instructional team and the Principal and monthly school-wide meetings where representatives of all constituencies meet for the purpose of sharing information and making school-wide decisions. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section 4  Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 240,850.00 0 12,366.00 0 2,486,135 references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X N/A X N/A X Column B Section Reference(s) Sections 5 & 7 N/A Sections 5 & 7 N/A Sections 5 & 7 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not 5  available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 6  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. IS 68, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. IS 68 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 7  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 8  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Isaac Bildersee Intermediate School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will 9  share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 0  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 1  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 2  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 3  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 4  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The main focus of our Title III program is to help our students excel in their academics as they are acquiring a new language. We will accomplish this by creating two programs: A Saturday Academy and an After School Program. The first program will be a Saturday Math Enrichment Program for English Language Learners. Many ELLs may not have had sufficient training in Mathematics in their native country. They also have difficulty understanding the language or terms involved with Mathematics. The focus of the program is to help students improve in their areas of weakness, but also to enhance their math academic vocabulary as well. It will contain 20 English Language Learners, from both the 7th and 8th grade classes. These will be students who are at Transitioning and Expanding Proficiency Levels. The program will take place every Saturday morning from 8:00 am to 11:00 am. It will run from mid- October until the end of May, about 30 sessions. There will be a staff of one math and bilingually certified teacher. The second program will be after school. Our focus will be on the four modalities of acquiring a new language: speaking, listening, reading, and writing. After reviewing NYSESLAT data from the previous year, we have many students that are remaining at the same Proficiency Level from one year to the next. In addition, after the NYSELAT was administered this year, it was observed that students did not know how to address the different areas focused on during this exam. In this program, we will invite ELLS of all proficiency levels. The program will service about 30 students in the 6th, 7th, and 8th grades. It will begin in mid-October until the end of May. We will meet twice per week on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:30-4:30 pm. for a total of about 60 sessions. The language for the after school program is English. We will have a staff of 3 teachers: one ESL certified teacher, one Bilingually certified teacher, and one Content teacher, each of which is experienced in teaching ELA. In grade levels, homework help will be provided. Many ELLs are not able to get help they need to complete work because their family members are also ELLs. The group of 30 students will be split into 3 groups. The groups will be formed according to their NYSESLAT Proficiency Levels. The groups will be rotated to ensure that each group will participate in more than one activity based on each of the modalities. Our ELA resources for the after school program will be Read Theory, Epic Books, Getting Ready for the NYESLAT, and Activities from ISL Collective (website). Our Math resources will be 10 Marks, Engage NY, GO Math, and Ready NY The teachers and students will also have access to technology such as Smart Boards and computers for research and English Language Learner interactive activities. 5  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: : At I.S. 68, it is important to prepare teachers in order to have successful teaching experiences. For the Title III program teachers, a two hour orientation will take place in September. At this time, teachers will discuss the expectations and the setup of the program. Also they will be provided with materials and resources for any additional materials that will be needed. In addition, Professional Development will be provided through a check in and sharing of best practices in an hour session twice a month addressing instructional concerns. Planning time will also be provided. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: At I.S. 68, it is important that parents are informed about the programs their child participates in after school hours. They should understand its purpose and why their child should take part. In addition they should be able to witness their child’s progress. At the start of the program at the end of September, an orientation will be scheduled to meet the teachers involved in the after school program. Teachers will describe about the program, review a brief curriculum with the materials they will use and explain how the parents can help their children at home. Information will also be provided about the NYSESLAT exam and what it means for their English Language Learner, and how the program will help their child to be successful. Visuals and interpreters will be provided. Information provided will be translated into the parents’ native language. A Question/Answer session will follow where parents will be encouraged to ask questions about the program. In addition, every two weeks we will send home a "Topics Reviewed This Week" report provided by the teachers on Thursdays. At the end of the program, parents will be invited to an end of year showcase/celebration to highlight what their child has learned. Students will make presentations they have prepared at the completion of the program. Certificates will be given for participation in the program. Awards will also be distributed. The provider will be the teachers of the after school program. Parents will be informed through translated notices sent home with the students as well as interpreted phone calls. 6 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. NA Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) NA  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 7  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 18 School Name IS 68, Isaac Bildersee Borough Brooklyn School Number 068 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Merve Williams Coach P.Luke ,ELA ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher D. Cook Teacher/Subject Area C.Damus BiLingual Math Teacher/Subject Area J.Surpris Bilingual Science Related-Service Provider Ms.Becker Superintendent Beverly Wilkins Assistant Principal Shamika Gamble Coach R.WHeeler Mathematics School Counselor D.Lombardi Parent Allison Moss Parent Coordinator P. Augustin Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) D. Cook, ESL C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 1 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 2 0 D. Student Demographics 8  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 435 Total number of ELLs 78 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 17.93% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): NA If yes, indicate language(s): H.Creole Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 15 15 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 15 0 0 15 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? At IS 68 we use various assessment to measure the early literary skills of our ELLS. Upon entrance our students take the NYSESLAT Tests.We also use the Pinnel system which provides insight into our the reading knowledge of of concepts of print,accuracy, fluency and comprehension. Teachers monitor growth in Reading by keeping a running record of all the Assessments given to English language learners. Real-time data is also captured on a daily basis through lesson assessments. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We have implemented a comprehensive internal system of diagnostic and formative assessments. regular monitoring of student performance data will take place it identify areas of need and set instructional priorities. Common meeting times for 9  teachers have been built into our regular schedule. Monday PD time will also be used to compile, analyze and synthesize student data. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? When using AMAO tool we can see how well are ELLS did compared to non ELLS.Our students are holding their own in math and ELA. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We have implemented a comprehensive internal system of diagnostic and formative assessments. regular monitoring of student performance data will take place it identify areas of need and set instructional priorities. Common meeting times for teachers have been built into our regular schedule. Monday PD time will also be used to compile, analyze and synthesize student data. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] We use a many types of student performance data as listed above. In ELA ,we review the students' reading level. Should the student be reading below grade level, the classroom teacher provides Tier 1 RTL.The student receives targeted intervention and is reassessed. In the case of new comers who are ELLS we look at the modalities and utilize targeted intervention to strengthen skills. Our ELLs who are eligible participate in a cycle of intense reading instruction in the After School program. This year we are offering a Saturday institute. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The analysis of the 2017 NYSESLAT will be provided. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Our findings will be disseminated to our community in a number of ways. All stakeholders within our school community will be informed of the performance of our students at our regular faculty meeting, parent meetings and School Leadership Team Meetings (SLT). Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. In the Free Standing ENL program students have the same ESL Teacher who teaches them ESL and Social Studies.The students are taught also by a Math and Science Teachers both of whom are Bilingual Haitian Creole certified. The non H.Creole speaking students are taught by teachers who are multilingual and Arabic speaking students are assisted by an Arabic speaking teachers' assistant. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. 0  Our Dual Language H.Creole class Math and Science are taught by two Licensed H.Creole Speakers and a licensed ESL teacher who also speaks H.Creole teaches the Native language class. To comply with the dual language requirements the ELA and Social are taught in English. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The ELL Teachers program the student ensuring the student receives the required units of ESL as per part 154.Beginners and Intermediate students receive 360 minutes and Advanced students 180 minutes. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our school uses data derived from the NYSITELL, NYSESLAT,standardized Test, Alternate Assessment tests to to make decisions that further language development. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELLS receive Tranlated Test in their Native Language..The option to take the Test in the native language is always made available. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Sife students receive extra attention during the school day and after school with the Title lll program. New Comers ,Developing and long term ELLs work with ESL and ELA Teachers to improve their understanding of ELA and math. We differentiate instruction for our ELL subgroups.Our teachers use a variety of manipulatives and and visuals to to enhance Comprehension.We also have a special program called NY Gear up to support our needy students. We also utilize the Push In model to support our ELLS during ELL,Math Social Studies etc.Our new comers are placed in a self contained ELL class so that they have the opportunity to make the adjustment and receive extra support. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Our students with Disabilities in a restrictive setting, ICT or self contained classes receive additional support from the ELL teachers.These teachers co teach and support the core curriculum.Lower level reading materials give students the opportunity to access the content area instruction and as a result help students to meet their IEP goals and objectives.Our team meetings with ELL Teachers and Sped teachers are designed to ensure that all objectives are met. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELL SWD participate in the same programs and have the have the same opportunities as other students.We utilize curricular,instructional and scheduling flexibility in order to meet their diverse needs.Our teachers attend the professional work shops that all our other content area teacher attend.Our teachers of SWD co teach with ELL teachers and share best strategies for success with ELLS with disabilities.Our related service providers play an important role in assisting our SWD. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 1  The intervention for ELLS in Math ,ELA,Science takes place in the Push In and Pull out model. Our ELLS get additional support in language development by focusing on the use of Vocabulary.We use high interest [perhaps slightly lower level reading materials to build their confidence and move forward to the Common Core required materials to meet the standards.We use the students' background to take advantage of their concept knowledge and build on that knowledge.We utilize graphic organizers ,visuals in texts, videos. We also academic language to help the student to grow. In math and Science lots of hands on materials is provided. We are very much focused on instruction in the After-School Programs and spend a lot of time in small group settings interacting with our students and focusing on the areas where support is needed. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? There is a Dual Language program in Haitian Creole which started in September. The purpose of the program was to meet the specific needs of our growing Haitian population.The teachers who are teaching in this program are licencsd H.Creole Bilingual teachers and will be teaching the content area in Science,Math,Social Studies in both languages. ELA will be taught in English but will be supported by the ESL teachers who will be pushing in. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Paste response to question here: N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs participate in the Title lll After school program which does targeted instruction for ELLS and student with inconsistent formal education. The School has recently acquired a Grant for Robotics and the Dual Language and ELL classes will be the utilizing this state of the Art program.Our ELLs are part of all instructional and all school events. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Students are using Ipads, Netbooks,Laptops and computers to do research.Students also will visit Museum of Architecture while they get hands on experience in how to plan a community.Robotics will be part of the students curriculum in After-school.Our ELL students will be at the fore front of the use of all new available technology. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The ESL teachers who have the native language skills use this knowledge to target weaknesses and turn them into strengths. In the Dual Language programs teaching takes place for at least 50% in the Native Language. in Science ,Math and Social Studies these teachers are licensed to provide the content area subjects in the Native Language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Middle school ELLS receive the necessary Push in services so that no class time is missed in combination with scaffolding provided by their ESL Teachers. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Students are using Ipads,Netbooks,Laptops and computers to do research.Students also will visit Museum of Architecture while they get hands on experience in how to plan a community.Robotics will be part of the students curriculum in Afterschool.Our ELL students will be at the fore front of the use of all new available technology. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Parent who register their children early meet the ESL Teachers and parent coordinator and have the translated materials available that tells parents the options available to them.Parents also meet the Dual language staff that familiarizes them with the program.there is also a get to know your child's teacher session before school starts. 2  17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? ELLS are offered Spanish as an elective however in the Dual language program Haitian Creole is 50% of the language of instruction. By teaching H.Creole students who do not speak H.Creole at the outset develop skills in this new language. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? The model that is used is 50-50 self contained.Teaching in content area is 50% in English and 50% in Haitian Creole.The instruction takes place one day in English the next day in Haitian Creole.Students will find that on day 1 Instruction is in English ,Instruction on day 2 will be in H.Creole. For the emergent child both languages are taught in sequence.The goal is development of language skills in both languages. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? ELL teachers received PD's sponsored by the BFSC and the Office of English language learners. ESL teachers also attend PD's at the District office and the office of English language learners has sponsored many PD's which our teachers attend.Our Dual language teachers have received training and courses to prepare them to effectively teach in the Dual Language program.ESL teachers will be providing PD's to monolingual teachers on how to teach ELLS. Paste response to question here:ESL Teachers are currently receiving PD's from the District in how to adopt their teaching to the Common Core standards. The ELL and Dual language personnel are constantly sharing information and turn key new information acquired at the District level and at the PD's sponsored by the Office of English language learners. school faculty conferences give ELL teachers the opportunity to share with monolingual faculty. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our ESL teachers turn key information on best practices with ELLS to the Monolingual staff. Our teachers are familiar with the Elementary School Curricular.We also have a literacy coach who helps to align the literacy PD for our teachers so that we can meet the needs of our incoming middle school ELLS. Paste response to question here: All of our ELL teachers and Bilingual teachers receive in house and off site PD's provided by our BFSC and now District.in addition .Classroom teachers will be provided with structured PD's ,Workshops,which are specifically designed to modify instruction in the content area for teachers who teach ELLS and are geared towards developing vocabulary and improve comprehension.The PD's are Common Core aligned.During our faculty conferences we discuss strategies that will help ELLS 3  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our ELL parents are an integral part of the process. All communication with parents is translated into the appropriate native language.Parents recently participated in the first Parent ELLS orientation session.Staff members who are fluent in H.Creole and Spanish were able to do presentations that guaranteed a better understanding of the new educational system the child is in.Parents also were made aware of the Title lll program that is specifically designed to be very helpful to their students.Every attempt was made to clarify the objectives and goals in this program. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. We have had a Saturday session and encouraged parents to attend.There was specifically Food with its origins in Haiti and children's art and drawings were put on display. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 4 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Merve Williams, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 5  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Isaac Bildersee School DBN: 18K68 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) M.Williams S.Gamble P. Augustin C.Damus Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Allison Moss Parent D. Cook C.Damus P.Luke Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 6  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 18K068 School Name: Isaac Bildersee Superintendent: Beverly Wilkins The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Diane Cook ENL Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The Home language Identificatrion Survey govern the Language that parents will communicate in with the school.In our school the population that is incoming is abot 40% Haitian .Creole speaking.Teachers ,Guidance Counsellors and Deans together reach out to the community in the language that they are most comfortable with.At the parent meetings the parents talk to the parent coordinator who ensures that they receive the appropriate language documents.The ELL teacher is involved at the start of registration of ELLS. Translated documents are given to these parents, and if there is a need for further assisstance the NYCDOE is contacted to furnish a translator.We request a translator in advance to avoid inconvenience to the parent. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 7  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral The languages that are most prevalent in this school are Haitian Creole,Arabic and Spanish and French .We have in the past had a small number of Chinese speakers.The documents are available in the above mentioned languages.Many parents also prefer documents in English but we always offer the option of the documents in the native language. Haitian parents Arabic parents 50% Haitian 50% 70% Arabic 30% 70% Hispanic 30% Hispanic parents 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Parent Surveys, August 28, 2017, September 5, 2017 Parent Choice Forms, and HILS Forms #Upon Registration. Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Using translation services from central and bilingual staff members. Entitlement and Non-entitlement forms after NYSITELL results Post NYSITELL Exam. Translation services provided by the NYCDOE translation and interpretation services. Parent Notification Forms of Placement of ELLS or Non-placement 8  Parent Appeals Forms of ELL Designation Subsequent to appeal, if appeal is requested by parent. Translation services provided by the NYCDOE translation and interpretation services. PTA Notices Two weeks before upcoming events. Translation by bilingual staff. All upcoming tests (i.e. NYSESLAT, NYS ELA/Math/Science Tests) Ongoing All items will be available in several languages courtesy of NYCDOE. Programs and Services 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings Parent Orientation September 19, 2017, January 16, 2018 During Orientation: - Discussions on Curriculum and State requirements at least at the start of the school year -Meeting with Guidance counsellors and meetings with Deans when needed. Possible visit by attendance teachers only if child is absent frequently Parent Teacher Conferences September 26, 2017 November 29-30, 2017 March 6-7, 2018 How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Parent coordinator & Bilingual Staff Parent Coordinator & Bilingual Staff 9  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of an emergency, the schools Building Response Team-BRT will be activated. At that time, systems for notifying all parents and families will be implemented. Our School Parent Coordinator-PC, who speaks Haitian-Creole fluently will provide translation services where adequate. Additional staff responding on behalf of the BRT and ENL population will provide support in communicating to families as necessary. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Creating a team comprised of the ENL teacher, Bilingual teachers, Guidance Counselor, and Parent Coordinator to provide training regarding the provisions of Chancellor's Regulation A-663 and make the aware of what resources are available to them. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We will have on display in the main office documents in multiple languages that advise parents of the availability of Translators and translated documents in the school.The same postings in the Hallways will also inform parents of the services. Parents will be able to learn from the postings that the DOE provides information on services in all languages. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will create a parent survey form that will ask questions about the availability and the quality of services. Parents will have the opportunity to speak to a staff member.Process will be encouraged. 0 
