 32K086 School Name: P.S. 086 THE IRVINGTON Principal: TINA MOSCHELLA ANDRE   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: PS 86K The Irvington 333200010086 K-5 220 Irving Ave 718-574-0252 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 3K086 718-919-1839 Fax: Christina Shaw cshaw5@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Dr. Tina Moschella Jenifer Pace Mariela Rosales Monica Bojaca Mariela Rosales N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 32 Sheila Gorski Superintendent: 797 Bushwick Ave, Brooklyn, NY 11221 Superintendent’s Office Address: SGorski@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-574-1100 Phone Number: 718-574-1245 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Brooklyn North Bernadette Fitzgerald FSC: Executive Director:   131 Livingston Street, Room 501, Brooklyn, NY 11201 Executive Director’s Office Address: BFitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 347-225-5119 Phone Number: 718-935-4314 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Dr. Tina Moschella Jenifer Pace MarielaRosales N/A MarielaRosales Virginia Best RogerBudd Monica Bojaca Christina Shaw *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) MarielaRosales Maura Bautista Carolina Tapia Maria Rocha Antonia Perez Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission at P.S. 86 is to create within our students the abilities and self-confidence essential to the development of high academic skills by using enrichment/intervention strategies along with differentiation of instruction for all learners. We seek to provide a challenging curriculum with flexibility to meet the needs of each student by using informal and formal assessments throughout the year. We firmly believe that all students can and will learn. We encourage students to take responsibility for their learning, while enlisting the collaborative efforts of peers, parents, teachers and non-teaching staff and community leaders. This joint effort will inspire excellent achievement for all. P.S.   86 models itself as a school community where all students will meet and exceed the standards. The parents, staff and students will share in the process necessary to make students life-long learners and productive members of society. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Our school community is diverse with unique characteristics and needs. The student body is 93% Hispanic, 2.34% White and 1.04% Black. Of our 384 enrolled students, 29% are English Language Learners (ELLs) and 23% are students with special needs. Amongst the special education population, 16.85% of students receive related services only while 9% spend less than 20% of the week in a special education classroom setting and 10% receive between 21-59% of services in a special education classroom. Half of our special education students are in ICT classrooms and 11% are in a self-contained classroom setting. Student attendance is high at 96.5% to date. All students receive lunch free of charge but 91% of students qualify for free lunch, 2.86% are eligible for reduced lunch and 1.3% qualify to pay full price for meals. Currently, we have 41 students (11%) in temporary housing. Our school offers additional resources and supports for students who are in temporary housing (whether it be a shelter or doubling up situation). We purchase school uniforms for these children and make them a priority for all after school programs (ELA, Math, ELL Academy, RiseBoro, etc.). These students are invited to go on class trips for free and don’t have to pay senior dues. We also reach out to the parents and guardians around the holidays so they can receive food and donations collected from our food drives. In the winter, we have a coat drive that benefits these students and we also give the students gifts as part of our Secret Santa amongst the staff. Our parent coordinator offers workshops specifically tailored to giving these parents and guardians information on local organizations and other resources for assistance. We have long standing partnerships with the Hispanic Family Service, the Brooklyn District Attorney’s office, and Councilman Rafael Espinal’s office. Our guidance counselor also organizes food drives to benefit homeless shelters, families in need and areas affected by natural disasters. We have several after school programs designed to enrich our students’ academic achievement. Amongst these is the RiseBoro afterschool program which runs Monday through Friday from 2:20-5:15 pm. The program’s goals are fivefold: · To foster social and emotional competencies and physical well-being · To provide opportunities for youth to explore their interests and creativity · To build skills that support academic achievement · To cultivate youth leadership and community engagement · To engage parents and other caretakers to support the above goals Our physical education teacher works in collaboration with our dance teacher to host family workshops and activities throughout the year. Our Speech and Language Pathologist also campaigns on behalf of autism, cerebral palsy and other disorders in collaboration with our School Assessment Team (SAT). Our school is dedicated to educating the whole child. In response to this commitment, our school formed a special committee in the recent years to work on addressing instructional requirements that enable student to learn and practice healthy habits. This Wellness Committee is made up of the following people: our science cluster, dance 0  teacher, health aide, administrators and our physical education teacher. The key personnel apply for grants, research programs that would address the specific needs of our students and establish structures for implementing wellness school wide. This committee meets as a group periodically on a monthly basis to turnkey new information and plan for future initiatives to better our school and neighborhood community. One such initiative is introducing an annual health fair for families to attend with their children. The dance and P.E. teachers lead in fun, engaging activities aimed at exercising or working out. Our school also participates in FitnessGram, a youth physical assessment, education and reporting tool. Our Substance Abuse Prevention & Intervention Specialist (SAPIS) visits several classrooms across the grades to give lessons covering drug prevention and intervention. In addition, she holds groups sessions twice a week. During these sessions, she covers the following topics: Importance of Life  Expressing Feelings  High Self-Esteem   Respect  Keeping Healthy  Investing in Your Future We recognize the importance the arts plays in our students’ academic and emotional development. Given a creative outlet to express themselves, our students have shined in many outlets: from musical performances to art showcases. As he has done for several years now, our music teacher commits his time to working with students outside of the official school day, meeting with them before and after school. His band of more than thirty students (grades 2-5) meets twice a week for an hour after school. The band members are all students performing on a level 3 in music, they understand the elements of music as taught to them over the years and can read music. During this time, they prepare for the winter and spring concerts. The band consists of students playing instruments in the four musical families: woodwind, brass, string and percussion (pitch and non-pitch). Students learn to play keyboard, xylophone, cymbals, tambourine, triangle, synthesizer, tubular bells, clarinet, baritone horn, trombone, alto saxophone, electric guitar, electric bass, violin and cello specifically. Every June the students participate in the final assembly (5th grade graduation). The choral and band students perform for the parents and distinguished guests. Our music teacher also oversees the audio visual crew. Participating students in grades 3-5 are trained to work the spotlights and set up and monitor the sound system during performances. Students learn how to read music starting in kindergarten. He incorporates many movement activities to get children to distinguish different beats and to get rhythm. They gradually move on to sight reading music, clapping out the beat or using cymbals or rhythm sticks. Students who show proficiency graduate to playing the keyboard. By January, all students are beginning to play instruments. By second grade, they are learning the recorder, clarinet and alto saxophone. Throughout the course of their tenure here, students will have had the opportunity to master multiple instruments if they so choose. Our school has a recently renovated dance studio with wall mirrors, bars and built in dance mats. Our dance teacher has familiarized herself with the units of study across the subject areas for the different grades and is embedding literacy and social studies content into her instruction. Our dance teacher is working to build on current partnerships with companies and residencies and establish new ones. This past school year we have received 50 free tickets to see Paul Taylor's company perform at Lincoln Center. At her direction, we also began a partnership with Movement Research. Other opportunities that were available to students, teachers and parents included invitations to attend performances at City Center and at NYU. Our school will continue its partnership with the Cultural After School Adventures (CASA) Program. Classroom teachers will work in conjunction with professional artists to provide a wide array of high quality cultural experiences to inner city youth enrolled in after school activities. Units of study are interdisciplinary and align with grade level academic objectives. The focus this past school year was visual arts. About 45 students in grades 2-5 are nominated 1  by their classroom teachers to participate in the 10-12 week enrichment program that meets once a week. Parents and students are invited to a culminating showcase performance held during the school day. Our school has a Special Events Committee, comprised of teachers, out of classroom personnel and other service providers/staff that was formed to offer students a fun, interactive experience outside of regular school hours. Entering its fifth full year, the volunteer committee is continuing its work aligned to its mission of engaging students and their parents in fun, family centered activities that will enrich their experience and deepen their sense of community and belonging at our school. They work with grade teams and parents to plan holiday themed events, dances, craft activities, family activities, fundraisers, raffles and giveaways. The Special Events Committee aims to boost student interest, morale and pride. Whenever possible, they look to find opportunities to build on pride in our school and our community. This upcoming year, the committee plans to focus on increasing parent engagement in the following areas:  Volunteering for various school events  Attending workshops hosted by the parent coordinator, guidance counselor and ESL coordinator  Participating in events coordinated by the committee and/or classroom teachers Our librarian is teaching the students how to use the automated circulation system to check out books (through MyLibrary NYC), and will share the responsibility of teaching about how to be a digital citizen with our guidance counselor. She also works collaboratively with classroom teachers to help with supplemental research for writing units/projects. A major responsibility is to give AIS support to students using the iReady writing program and vocabulary books as a resource. Our IEP teacher pulls groups of 3-5 students in grades 1-5 for RTI Tier II. She provides individual and/or small group research based interventions and progress monitoring for students at risk of reading failure. Her caseload includes students in a general education setting and those with an IEP. The students were identified for this intervention by their classroom teachers based on their overall ELA performance and their independent reading level (those reading at a level 1 based on our school wide grading policy). Once identified, the students were assessed using the SPIRE program resources and then given a level for which to work at. SPIRE is an intervention program that systematically and sequentially goes through structured lessons in the five critical areas of reading. We have a dual language program for K and 1. It is designed to continue developing students’ home languages in addition to English language skills. The program will serve ELLs and monolingual English proficient students. Additionally, the instruction will intentionally cultivate an appreciation for the students’ history and culture. The teacher will be following the roller coaster model: 1 day Spanish, 1 day English. Her instructional materials will include Journeys, Senderos, Go Math (in English and Spanish) and Fusion (science program in English and Spanish). 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our school has 23% of our students with an IEP and 20% who are English Language Learners. Our students with disabilities (SWDs) may require a special setting (integrated co-teaching or self-contained classroom) or flexible scheduling (push in/pull out services). Some of the specific needs of our SWDs include: bilingual speech language therapy, SETSS, counseling, occupational therapy, physical therapy, hearing education services and a crisis paraprofessional. Our ELL students require more visual supports to ensure access to curriculum, bilingual settings where appropriate, social emotional supports to ease their transition to another country and language, and parental engagement in a variety of languages. 2  4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The Framework for Great Schools in which we made the most progress over the past year was within the area of strong family community ties. We went from 3.66 to 4.18 overall. Our school's instructional focus this year is, "Advancing student engagement by providing tasks which require students to use academic vocabulary and critical thinking skills for discussion and writing across content areas." This being so, our key areas of focus within the Framework for Great Schools are: Rigorous Instruction and Supportive Environment. By focusing on rigorous instruction, we will be customizing lessons to meet the unique needs of our students while still maintaining high standards aligned to the Common Core standards. For our approach to be effective, we must ensure that our students are learning in classrooms where they feel safe to take risks. We are continuing our work to challenge our students, while providing them scaffold supports. 3  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 32K086 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 384 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 12 12 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 17 18 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 98.0% % Attendance Rate 95.1% % Reduced Lunch 29.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.5% 93.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.95 3% 10% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 34.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 90% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A YSH Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 46 45 94.7% 3.1% 23.4% 1.0% 3.1% 0.5% 2 3% 8.3 38.7% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Grade 3 1. We have consistently improved our overall performance on the NYS ELA throughout the years, going from 11% of students achieving level 3 or 4 proficiency in 2014-15 to 20% in 2016-17. Most recently, on the 2017-18 ELA, 34% of our students scored at a level 3 or 4. 2. Specific areas of strength as identified by an analysis of the 2018 NYS ELA by grade are: 24% - L.3.4 Determine or clarify the meaning of an unknown and multiple meaning word and phrases based on grade 3 reading and content, choosing flexibly from a range of strategies. 27% - RL.3.2 - Recount stories, including fables, folktales and myths from diverse cultures; determine the central message, lesson or moral and explain how it is conveyed through key details in the text. 32% - RL.3.3 - Describe characters in a story (e.g., their traits, motivations or feelings) and explains how their actions contribute to the sequence of events. Grade 4 39% - RI.4.5 Describe the overall structure (e.g., chronology, comparison, cause/effect, problem/solution) of events, ideas, concepts or information in a text or part of a text. 41% - RI.4.3 Explain events, procedures, ideas or concepts in a historical, scientific or technical text, including what happened and why, based on specific information in the text. 45% - RL.4.6 Compare and contrast the point of view from which different stories are narrated, including the difference between first and third person narrations. Grade 5 28% - RL.5.5 Explain how a series of chapters, scenes or stanzas fit together to provide structure of a particular story, drama or poem. 5  38% - RI.5.6 Analyze multiple accounts of the same event or topic, noting important similarities and differences in the point of view they represent. 43% - RI.5.7 Draw on information from multiple print or digital sources, demonstrating the ability to locate an answer to a question quickly or to solve a problem efficiently. A consistent area of need is building literacy competency skills. An analysis of the spring 2018 ELA showed our students struggle specifically with determining the central message/theme, determining the meaning of general academic and domain specific words and phrases and integrating information from two texts to write about the topic. Our area of focus will be moving overall performance on the NYS ELA for all students in grades 3-5. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will plan for and implement rigorous Next Generation Standards-aligned unit and daily lessons in ELA. At least 40% of all students in grades 3-5 will achieve level 3 or 4 literacy proficiency, as measured by the spring 2019 state ELA exam. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Research Based Programs, Systems and/or Structures & Professional Development: 1. Teachers, Paraprofessionals 1. Sept-June 1. Comprehensive Professional Learning: the calendar will include 30 hours minimum of PD around establishing best practices in ELA. 2. Teachers 2. Actionable Feedback: Teachers will receive ongoing verbal and written support from administrators on their practice. 1. Administration, Professional Development Committee 2. Sept-June 2. Administration 3. Sept-June 3. Administration, Literacy Coach, Literacy teacher, ESL Coordinator, IEP Teacher, SETSS teacher 5. Oct-June 6. Sept-June 4. Administration, Grade Leaders 7. Sept-June 3. Teachers, Paraprofessionals 4. Sept-June 4. Classroom teachers, ENL teachers, Literacy Coach, Science teacher, Literacy teacher 5. Teachers 3. Distributive Leadership: Lead teachers will facilitate professional development sessions where they will turnkey learning to specific groups. The sessions will be tailored to the teachers’ level of expertise in each particular focus. On Mondays, teachers will participate in various PDs being offered. On Tuesdays and during common prep periods, teachers will work on applying the new learning to their instructional practice. 4. Team Planning: Grade teams use their common preps and the professional planning time after school to develop lessons with vocabulary development in mind. These lessons bridge vocabulary across the content areas (social studies or science) and give students opportunities to be creative while producing various work products. Teachers look for opportunities to make the lessons more rigorous by providing multiple entry points for all learners, and appropriate scaffold supports. Inquiry: After analyzing trends from student performance on the ELA, our Core Inquiry vertical team of grade leaders set school wide action research cycles for guided reading and interpreting and explaining text evidence using inference skills. 5. 6. Professional Development: Teachers and out of classroom personnel are sent to off site professional development covering a wide range of topics, many of which include vocabulary and writing techniques. In addition to this, the professional learning 6. Teachers, paraprofessionals, Administration 8. Sept-June 9. Nov-March 7. Teachers, paraprofessionals, Administration 5. Administration, Grade Leaders, ENL Coordinator & Teacher, Literacy Coach, SETSS teacher 6. Administration 7  8. Teachers, ESL Coordinator, ENL teacher, Literacy Coach, Literacy teacher 9. Students (bottom third, level 1 & 2) 7. Administration, Teacher Team Leaders/Inquiry Committee 8. Administration, Literacy Coach 9. Administration, Teachers structure includes workshops facilitated by our Literacy coach to target topics related to building strong readers.Classroom Approach: With the MOSL performance tasks, teachers in all grades are teaching their students to think metacognitively. Students are guided to reflect on their personal growth and progress and set their own goals in reading and writing. Through strategic skill work, they work towards accomplishing these targets. Additionally, they are taught to contribute to classroom and small group discussions using accountable talk stems to help them make connections, ask questions, state wonderings and add on to what their peers contribute. Teachers ask tiered questions according to the Depth of Knowledge levels and Karin Hess Matrix. They encourage their students to make connections across the subject areas with rigorous, relevant performance tasks that incorporate reading, writing, science and/or social studies. Throughout this entire process, vocabulary acquisition is stressed and intentionally incorporated into the daily listening, speaking, reading and writing tasks. 7. Data Driven Instruction: Data is used to inform instruction in the classroom. Assessments appropriately measure the lesson objects and are aligned to the CCLS and curriculum. There is an emphasis placed on reading and writing strategies using informational text. The lessons are aligned to the Common Core State Standards. Additionally, a Mock ELA will be administered to all students in grades 3-5 twice this school year to help teachers identify areas of need and adjust instructional targets accordingly. 8. Data Meetings: Teachers keep careful records of student progress in the form of checklists, data sheets and conferring notes. Their data will be shared and discussed regularly at grade level data meetings with administration, literacy coaches and other out of classroom teachers. 9. Writing Program: Students in grades 3-5 with an overall ELA score of level 1 and level 2 will be invited to participate in an after-school writing program slated to start in January. The curriculum will be structured around Informational Writing with an emphasis on vocabulary where students will determine the meaning of general academic and domain-specific words and phrases in a text relevant to their grade to address the area of need identified in our analysis of the NYS ELA. 8  Strategies to Address the Needs of High Need Subgroups: 1. Inclusive, Collaborative Planning: Teachers will work with out of classroom personnel, such as the SETSS provider and the ESL service providers, while planning the interdisciplinary unit plans. These individuals will help identify multiple entry points for ELLs and special education students. Additionally, they will push in and pull out to provide supports for the students in these subgroups. 1. ELLs, SWDs, SIFE, bottom third performing students 2. Special Education teachers, Speech teachers 2. Targeted PD: Our IEP teacher and SETSS provider will 1. Sept-June 2. November, January, March & May 1. Classroom teachers, SETSS teacher, IEP teacher, ESL Coordinator, ESL teacher, Literacy Coach, Literacy teacher, Speech teachers 3. Sept-June 2. IEP teacher, SETSS teacher 3. All teachers 4. Sept-June 4. All students 3. Administration, Mentors 5. Sept-June 5. SIFE and Entering ELLs 4. All teachers, Administration 5. ESL Coordinator, ESL teacher, Classroom teachers host a workshop series for ICT teachers (on one on) on how to write quality IEPs. She will meet with the teachers and review the components of the IEP and get help them determine appropriately challenging goals and discuss how to get the students to obtain them. 3. Scaffold Supports: To ensure that all students, including our ELLs, IEP and low performing general education students, are benefiting from instruction, the lessons will include motivational/engagement components throughout the unit of study. Technology will be utilized as a scaffold support, with BrainPop videos and interactive SmartBoard lessons being just some examples of how teachers will differentiate lessons. Teachers will plan out questions and tasks prior to ensure they are tiered and address the four DOK levels. Students will also rely on picture supports and manipulatives to help them understand and respond to the tasks. Any worksheets or graphic organizers will be modified to meet the unique needs of these target subgroups. 4. Group Work: Teachers will organize groups according to student levels and will work with them individually as needed. Within these groups, teachers will maintain conferring notes to help them anticipate future needs and to plan their next steps. 5. Strategic ESL Support: Students identified as being SIFE are receiving push in support from the ESL coordinator/teacher throughout the week. She and the classroom teacher work closely to create, monitor and work towards goals for these students. The students are given heavily scaffolded work at their level to meet the lesson and language objectives established. N/A N/A N/A N/A 9  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Involvement and Engagement (September 2018-June 2019): 1. Communication: All communication sent home to parents is in the parents’ preferred home language. Information related to parent programs, meetings and other activities is also in a format parents can understand. 2. Parent Teacher Conferences: Teachers share progress reports at parent teacher conferences, annual IEP review meetings and other times as requested by the teacher or parent. A Spanish translator is provided by the school for all meetings. Other low incidence language translations are provided via the Translation Unit. 3. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP): Our school’s PIP was developed by parents to outline specific school goals and activities for students. It is a joint contract between parents, students and staff illustrating how responsibility for student academic achievement and success will be shared. 4. Monthly PTA Meetings: Parents are invited to learn about any new initiatives being adopted by the school and workshops/events being held. It is also a forum for parents and guardians to voice any questions or concerns that they may have. Our principal and parent coordinator update parents on development and review of district and building parent involvement policies. Meetings are held in morning at 8:30 and in the evenings at 5:30 on a rotating basis monthly to accommodate different parent schedules. At least one teacher attends the morning meetings to update parents on current initiatives and to inform them about upcoming events and encourage participation. 5. Monthly Newsletters: Notices are sent home in English and Spanish informing parents of upcoming school events, workshops and highlights from the past month. 6. Themed Parent Workshops: Parents are surveyed to determine which topics are the most relevant to them and workshops are then developed to meet their specific needs. Our parent coordinator hosts these sessions, inviting doctors, lawyers and other relevant field professionals to come and speak to parents about issues that affect and are important to them. Throughout the school year, the following themed workshops will be made available for parents to attend include but are not limited to: o Technology Workshops: Several workshop series on how to engage student learning at home and how to access online curriculum accounts. 7. Parent Outreach: Our guidance counselor hosts meetings every year to inform parents of the middle school application process. There are morning and evening sessions in addition to 1:1 appointments parents can make. The purpose of these meetings is to help parents and their children smoothly transition to the next chapter of their educational career. 8. School Leadership Team (SLT): Parents, teachers, administration and staff work together to improve educational outcomes and determine the school’s educational direction. This committee meets regularly, reflecting on the school’s overall vision, goals, priorities and the strategies and resources that will be used to achieve this mission. Parents are involved in development and review of program plans. Also, parent members are informed of new district and building parent involvement policies. 9. Awards Assemblies: Parents are invited to attend monthly assemblies where student progress and achievement is recognized. These are held three times a year. 10. Open Communication: Teachers use the parent engagement block on Tuesdays effectively. They reach out to parents to keep them abreast of their child's academic progress and behavior. They communicate by phone, notice or in person to praise the child's progress and/or share any concerns they may have. Parents are encouraged to contact their child's teacher(s) and/or the parent coordinator whenever they have an issue. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 0  A combination of tax levy and reimbursable funding will be allocated to pay for:  Per diem substitutes as teachers meet as grade level teams and attend professional development  Weekly data meetings for grade level teams to analyze student work and discuss progress, concerns and next steps with administration  Essential materials and resources Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded X In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the Inquiry Team will convene to evaluate progress and determine if 30% of students in grades 3-5 have achieved level 3 or 4 performance on the mock ELA. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Increased student performance will be gauged in part by:  Teacher created Mock ELA (compiled from previously released exams)  Overall school-wide pre/post ELA assessment gain results  Student work products Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1. According to a period analysis of the 2017-18 OORS data, we have decreased the number of suspensions. In the 2016-17 school year we had a total of 3 principal suspensions and 2 teacher removals, this school year we only had one of each. 2. An hourly analysis of the level 1-5 incidents for the 2017-18 school year show that there is a spike of incidents from 9-2pm with a concentration occurring during the three lunch periods. The majority of incidents occur in the classrooms and involve much of the same students in kindergarten and grades 1 and 4. The overall number of incidents has increased with 106 incidents reported this year as compared to 49 last year. The priority needs that will be addressed in this goal are centered on supporting students who are known to have behavior or emotional problems that cause them to act out. In addition to continuing with PBIS and other positive incentives, our guidance counselor and School Based Support Team will work with teachers to help students set goals, monitor progress and reflect on their actions. Students who are identified throughout the year as being at risk may receive counseling, flexible scheduling with opportunities to work with cluster teachers in smaller settings and have their parents/guardians invited to join them in class. Because the majority of incidents (50) occurred in the classroom, teachers will also concentrate efforts in communicating with parents the high expectations for learning while offering them resources to help them support their child’s academic success. 3. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers and staff will have used PBIS, restorative practice and social emotional specific strategies to build an environment where students feel safe and are treated with respect by their peers as measured by a 10% decrease in the number of behavior reports filed in Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS). 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Research Based Programs, Systems and/or Structures & Professional Development: 1. All students 1. The RULER Program: This past year our principal and two 1. December-June 1. Administration & classroom teachers 2. All students 2. Sept-June 2. Administration, Guidance Counselor, all staff 3. All students 2. Sept-June 3. Administration & all teachers teachers attended a workshop provided by the Yale Center for Emotional Intelligence. The RULER Program is founded on the thinking that we must Recognize emotions in self and others, Understand the causes and consequences of emotions, Label emotions accurately, Express emotions appropriately and Regulate emotions effectively. This year we will turnkey the training and initiate this program within our school culture to help promote healthy responses to all ranges of emotions. 2. Positive Behavior Intervention Strategies (PBIS): A committee comprised of administration, teachers and other support staff will meet periodically to review school data from OORS and I-log to identify areas/staff members in need of support. They will research and design strategies for improving student behavior and preventing occurrences. 3. Character Building: We will continue our school wide practices of building growth mindset and being a “bucket filler.” Additionally, we will build on promoting our character trait of the month to include activities that students can do in the classroom or at home with their families to help model and emphasize the importance of each trait (respectful, responsible, kind, caring, trustworthy and so on). Strategies to Address the Needs of High Need Subgroups: Counseling: At risk students Sept-June Administration, guidance counselor, SBST, key staff Students will receive counseling as recommended by the School Based Support Team (SBST). Students referred by teachers as being at high risk or showing a tendency for aggressive, unhealthy behaviors will be invited to special activities designed with them in mind. They will explore their emotions and work 3 directly with the guidance counselor and other staff to establish a plan to address their needs. N/A N/A N/A N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Involvement and Engagement: 1. Open Communication/Parent Teacher Conferences: All communication sent home to parents is in the parents’ preferred home language. Information related to parent programs, meetings and other activities is also in a format parents can understand. Parents will be notified immediately of any incidents involving their child. Teachers share academic and behavioral progress at parent teacher conferences, annual IEP review meetings, during the parent engagement block on Tuesday afternoons and other times as requested by the teacher or parent. Teachers use the parent engagement block on Tuesdays effectively. Parents are encouraged to contact their child's teacher(s) and/or the parent coordinator whenever they have an issue. 2. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP): Our school’s PIP was developed by parents to outline specific school goals and activities for students. It is a joint contract between parents, students and staff illustrating how responsibility for student academic achievement and success will be shared. 3. Monthly Newsletters: Notices are sent home in English and Spanish informing parents of upcoming school events, workshops and highlights from the past month. Behavior workshops and special series (such as Autism Workshops) will be announced here. 4. Themed Parent Workshops: Workshops are held throughout the school year addressing numerous topics. Our parent coordinator organizes these sessions, inviting doctors and other relevant field professionals to come and speak to parents about issues that affect and are important to them. 5. Parent Outreach: Our guidance counselor and parent coordinator reach out to parents as needed to provide resources specific to their child’s needs, be it behavior or otherwise. Parents are also invited to come in and be with their child throughout the day while a plan is established to respond to the child’s needs. 6. School Leadership Team (SLT): Parents, teachers, administration and staff work together to improve educational outcomes and determine the school’s educational direction. This committee meets regularly, reflecting on the school’s overall vision, goals, priorities and the strategies and resources that will be used to achieve this mission. Parents are involved in development and review of program plans. Also, parent members are informed of new district and building parent involvement policies. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. A combination of tax levy and reimbursable funding will be allocated to pay for:  Per diem substitutes as teachers meet for planning and attend professional development  Essential materials and resources Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other 4  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019, administration will meet with our guidance counselor, SBST and other key staff to analyze the OORS data to date to determine if there is a 10% decrease in incidents (as shown by 36 or less incidents being reported). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instruments of measure that will be used as a measure of progress include:  OORS data from September 2018-February 2019, specifically the total number of incidents and the level  Parent/student feedback from workshops  School created survey for teachers Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. 1. As reported in the 2016-17 School Quality Report, 94% of teachers responded positively to questions about collaborative teachers with 97% saying that teachers work together to design instructional programs (beating the citywide average of 93%). Moreover, 94% of our teachers say that they have opportunities to work productively with colleagues and that teachers feel responsible that all students learn. This same report notes that 97% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that overall, their professional development experiences this year have been sustained and coherently focused, rather than short-term and unrelated. 2. According to the results of the 2016-17 NYC School Survey, 84% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that overall, their professional development experiences this year have included enough time to think carefully about, try and evaluate new ideas. Only 60% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that overall their professional development experiences this year have included opportunities to work productively with teachers from other schools. With this in mind, a focus need for this school year is to allow for more time for teachers to implement and reflect on PDs. Also, our school plans to offer more opportunities for staff to have sustained collaboration with other sites. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, classroom teachers will have worked collaboratively across the content areas to design meaningful, rigorous and engaging activities for students as measured by each grade completing a minimum of two project based learning tasks. Forty percent of students in kindergarten through fifth grade will have scored at a level 3 or 4 on their project based learning tasks. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Research Based Programs, Systems and/or Structures & Professional Development: 1. Team Planning: Grade teams will use their common 1. All students, Classroom teachers 1. Sept-June 1. Administration, Grade Teams, Literacy Coach preps and the professional planning time after school to develop project based learning (PBL) tasks across the content areas. 2. Professional Development: Teachers will be sent out to 2. All staff 2. Sept-June 3. Oct-June 2. Administration, Literacy Coach, ESL Coordinator, Literacy teacher 3. All students 4. Sept-June 5. Sept-June 4. All students 5. All students, Classroom teachers, ESL teachers, Literacy teacher 3. Administration, LPP model teachers, 3rd grade team, Literacy Coach 4. Administration, Literacy Coach, mentor teachers 5. Administration, Literacy Coach, grade leaders, PDs offsite and given opportunities to turnkey information with their colleagues. Administration, literacy coaches and other key staff will present research on best practices. 3. Learning Partners Program (LPP): We were accepted into the LPP and will begin a collaborative relationship with two other schools in the fall. The learning focus area we identified was student engagement so we intend to incorporate what is learned from our partnerships to improve our PBL tasks. 4. Classroom Approach: With performance tasks, teachers in all grades are teaching their students to think metacognitively. Students are guided to reflect on their personal growth and progress and set their own goals in reading, writing and math. Through strategic skill work, they work towards accomplishing these targets. Students are taught to contribute to classroom and small group discussions using accountable talk stems to help them make connections, ask questions, state wonderings and add on to what their peers contribute. Teachers ask tiered questions according to the Depth of Knowledge levels and Karin Hess Matrix. They encourage their students to make connections across the subject areas with rigorous, relevant performance tasks that incorporate reading, writing, science and/or social studies. 5. Data Meetings: Teachers keep careful records of student progress in the form of checklists, data sheets and conferring notes. Their data will be shared and discussed regularly at grade level data meetings with 7  administration, literacy coaches and other out of classroom teachers. Strategies to Address the Needs of High Need Subgroups: 1. Inclusive, Collaborative Planning: Teachers will work with out of classroom personnel, such as the SETSS provider, ESL service providers and the speech and language pathologists, while planning the interdisciplinary unit plans. These individuals will help identify multiple entry points for ELLs and special education students. Additionally, they will push in and pull out to provide supports for the students in these subgroups. Teachers will look for opportunities to make the lessons more rigorous by providing multiple entry points for all learners, and appropriate scaffold supports. 2. Scaffold Supports: To ensure that all students, including our ELLs, IEP and low performing general education students, are benefiting from instruction, the lessons will include motivational/engagement components throughout the unit of study. Technology will be utilized as a scaffold support. Teachers will plan out questions and tasks prior to ensure they are tiered and address the four DOK levels. Students will also rely on picture supports and manipulatives to help them understand and respond to the tasks. Any worksheets or graphic organizers will be modified to meet the unique needs of these target subgroups. 3. Group Work: Teachers will organize groups according to student levels and will work with them individually as needed. Within these groups, teachers will maintain conferring notes to help them anticipate future needs and to plan their next steps. 4. Strategic ESL Support: Students identified as being SIFE are receiving push in support from the ESL coordinator/teacher throughout the week. She and the classroom teacher work closely to create, monitor and work towards goals for these students. The students are given heavily scaffolded work at their level to meet the lesson and language objectives established. 1. ELLs, SWD, SIFE, bottom third 1. Sept-June 2. Sept-June 1. Administration, classroom teachers, SETSS teacher, IEP teacher, ESL Coordinator, ESL teacher, Speech teachers 2. ELLs, SWD, low bottom third 3. Sept-June 4. Sept-June 3. All students 4. ELLs, SIFE 2. Administration, classroom teachers, SETSS teacher, IEP teacher, ESL Coordinator, ESL teacher, Speech teachers 3. Administration, classroom teachers, ESL Coordinator, ESL teacher, Speech teachers 4. Administration, ESL Coordinator, ESL teacher, Speech teachers N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement N/A N/A N/A How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Involvement and Engagement: 8  1. Open Communication/ Parent Teacher Conferences: All communication about the project based learning tasks will be sent home to parents is in the parents’ preferred home language. Information related to parent programs, meetings and other activities is also in a format parents can understand. Teachers share progress reports at parent teacher conferences, annual IEP review meetings and other times as requested by the teacher or parent. 2. Monthly PTA Meetings: Parents are invited to learn about any new initiatives being adopted by the school and workshops/events being held. It is also a forum for parents and guardians to voice any questions or concerns that they may have. Teachers will be invited to speak about the PBL tasks and give highlights. 3. Monthly Newsletters: Notices are sent home in English and Spanish informing parents of upcoming school events, workshops and highlights from the past month. Each grade’s project based learning task will be identified in the newsletter. 4. Themed Parent Workshops: Parents will be invited to workshops designed to help them support their child with their work on the PBL task (from researching information to understanding the content to building healthy work habits at home). 5. School Leadership Team (SLT): Parents, teachers, administration and staff work together to improve educational outcomes and determine the school’s educational direction. This committee meets regularly, reflecting on the school’s overall vision, goals, priorities and the strategies and resources that will be used to achieve this mission. The SLT will hear updates on the PBL task initiative and offer suggestions and other feedback in response. 6. Student Showcases: Families will be invited to see their child’s work exhibited in a showcase. Students will present their projects and explain the process they went through in completing the task. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. A combination of tax levy and reimbursable funding will be allocated to pay for:  Per diem substitutes as teachers meet for planning and attend professional development  Essential materials and resources Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the Teacher Team Leader Committee will meet to determine if the school is making 50% progress towards this school wide goal. Student work samples and data will be shared and analyzed to see if 40% of the students scored at a level 3 or 4 on their first project based learning task. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Administration will meet with the PD committee to review the following as instruments of measure:   current project based learning tasks to date designed by each grade feedback from classroom teachers and support service providers about the process (collected in survey form) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. The 2016-17 NYC School Survey reports that 100% of teachers agree or strongly agree that the principal makes clear to the staff her expectations for meeting instructional goals and that she communicates a clear vision for the school. The entire teaching staff also agrees that our principal sets high standards for student learning. All teachers also stated that the principal carefully tracks student academic progress and knows what is going on in the classrooms. Moreover, 100% of teachers strongly feel that our principal participates in instructional planning with teacher teams. 97% of teachers agree that the principal understands how children learn and sets clear expectations for teachers about implementing what they have learned in professional development. 2. Our Instructional Focus is, "Advancing student engagement by providing tasks which require students to use academic vocabulary and critical thinking skills for discussion and writing across content areas." Our priority need according to the Framework for Great schools is building Effective School Leadership. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, staff will have received purposeful feedback in response to focused walk throughs and observations leading to increased professional growth as measured by 80% or more of teachers being rated Effective or Highly Effective in Danielson’s Framework for Teaching in Domain 3C: Engaging Students in Learning. Students will be fully engaged in learning tasks which will enhance their overall academic achievement. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Research Based Programs, Systems and/or Structures & Professional Development: 1. All teachers 2. Newly hired teachers 3. All teachers, paraprofessionals 4. All students, Inquiry students 1. Sept-June 2. Sept-June 3. Sept-June 1. Administration, Literacy Coach, Mentor teachers 2. Administration, Mentor teachers 3. Administration, Professional Development Team 4. Sept-June 5. All students 4. Administration, Literacy Coach, Grade Leaders 5. Sept-June 5. Administration, Grade teams 1. Actionable Feedback: Teachers will receive ongoing verbal and written feedback from administrators on their practice throughout the school year. Teachers will be invited to create professional and personal goals for the school year for administrators to help them with. 2. Mentor Teachers: Newly hired staff will be assigned to work with an expert teacher during their first year. Administration will communicate with the mentor areas of concern to be targeted in planning and modeling sessions with the new teacher. Teachers will be partnered intentionally based on area of certification and teacher areas of strength. 3. Professional Development: Teachers will be sent out to workshops and courses by administration based on areas of need. Staff will also be asked to share best practices with their grade teams or all staff to help enhance teaching practice. Research articles, books and other resources will be shared by administration throughout the year to help keep teachers current and help support academic inquiry. 4. Data Meetings: Teachers keep careful records of student progress in the form of checklists, data sheets and conferring notes. Their data will be shared and discussed regularly at grade level data meetings with administration, literacy coaches and other out of classroom teachers. Administration will provide feedback in response for the grade team to act on. 5. Team Planning: Grade teams use their common preps and the professional planning time after school to develop lessons and create and/or revise tasks. Teacher created curriculum maps and unit plans will be visited often to ensure the content is being 2 addressed in the classrooms. Teachers will look for opportunities to make the lessons more rigorous by providing multiple entry points for all learners, and appropriate scaffold supports. Technology extensions will also be intentionally included in lessons across the content areas. Strategies to Address the Needs of High Need Subgroups: 1. Inclusive, Collaborative Planning: Teachers will work with out of classroom personnel, such as the SETSS provider and the ESL service providers, while planning interdisciplinary unit plans. These individuals will help identify multiple entry points for ELLs and special education students. Additionally, they will push in and pull out to provide supports for the students in these subgroups. 2. Scaffold Supports: To ensure that all students, including our ELLs, IEP and low performing general education students, are benefiting from instruction, the lessons will include motivational/engagement components throughout the unit of study. Technology will be utilized as a scaffold support, with BrainPop videos and interactive SmartBoard lessons being just some examples of how teachers will differentiate lessons. Teachers will plan out questions and tasks prior to ensure they are tiered and address the four DOK levels. Students will also rely on picture supports and manipulatives to help them understand and respond to the tasks. Any worksheets or graphic organizers will be modified to meet the unique needs of these target subgroups. 3. Strategic ESL Support: Students identified as being SIFE are receiving push in support from the ESL coordinator/teacher throughout the week. She and the classroom teacher work closely to create, monitor and work towards goals for these students. The students are given heavily scaffolded work at their level to meet the lesson and language objectives established. N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 1. ELLs, SWDs, SIFE, bottom third 2. ELLs, SWD, bottom third 3. ELLs, SIFE 1. Sept-June 2. Sept-June 3. Sept-June 1. Administration, ESL Coordinator, ENL teachers, SETSS teacher, IEP teacher, classroom teachers 2. Administration, ESL Coordinator, ENL teachers, SETSS teacher, IEP teacher, classroom teachers 3. Administration, ESL Coordinator, ENL teachers N/A N/A N/A 3  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 1. Open Communication/Parent Conferences: All communication sent home to parents is in the parents’ preferred home language. Information related to parent programs, meetings and other activities is in a format parents can understand. Teachers share progress reports at parent teacher conferences, annual IEP review meetings and other times as requested by the teacher or parent. A Spanish translator is provided by the school for all meetings. Other low incidence language translations are provided via the Translation Unit. Teachers use the parent engagement block on Tuesdays effectively, reaching out to parents to keep them abreast of their child's academic progress and behavior. They communicate by phone, notice or in person to praise the child's progress and/or share any concerns they may have. Parents are encouraged to contact their child's teacher(s) and/or the parent coordinator whenever they have an issue 2. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP): Our school’s PIP was developed by parents to outline specific school goals and activities for students. It is a joint contract between parents, students and staff illustrating how responsibility for student academic achievement and success will be shared. 3. Monthly PTA Meetings: Parents are invited to learn about any new initiatives being adopted by the school and workshops/events being held. It is also a forum for parents and guardians to voice any questions or concerns that they may have. Our principal and teachers will periodically update parents on the school’s academic progress across subject areas. 4. Themed Parent Workshops: Parents will be invited to attend workshops on a host of topics, including how to support their child academically at home with the different content area. The parent coordinator will work with classroom teachers to organize these sessions. 5. School Leadership Team (SLT): Parents, teachers, administration and staff work together to improve educational outcomes and determine the school’s educational direction. The SLT will consider academic areas of concern and discuss how to best address it within the classroom and at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. A combination of tax levy and reimbursable funding will be allocated to pay for:  Per diem substitutes as teachers meet for planning and attend professional development  Essential materials and resources Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019, administration will meet with the instructional cabinet to determine if we are on track to meeting our goal. The benchmark will be 60% of observations to date showing teachers being Effective or Highly Effective within Domain 4E. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 4  Observations already recorded in Advance by the principal and assistant principal will be reviewed. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. The 2016-17 NYC School Survey reported that 88% of parents who completed the survey responded positively to questions about parent involvement. 95% of parents stated that since the beginning of the school year, they have communicated with their child’s teacher about their child’s performance sometimes or often and 97% said they have seen their child’s projects, artwork, homework or tests sometimes or often. Also, 95% of parents and guardians stated they are somewhat or very likely to go to a regularly scheduled parent-teacher conference. Our most recent Quality Review (2015-16) reports a score of 4.99 or “Well Developed” in how effectively we as a school partner with families to support student success. 2. A priority area of need has been identified based on the following data: o  81% of parents/guardians report that since the beginning of the school year they have been asked or had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school sometimes or often  74% of parents/guardians responded that they are somewhat or very likely to attend a general meeting or school event (open house, back to school night, play, dance sports event or science fair) Additionally, teachers and staff have noted parent involvement wasn’t as high as expected. This being so, the school is aiming to design events and other opportunities for parents to be engaged in the school community. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school community will have collaboratively engaged families in a minimum of five special events and/or projects centered on learning about and celebrating multicultural backgrounds. Activities will take place during and after school hours. This work will be done in an effort to strengthen family ties and improve students’ academic performance and social emotional behavior. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Research Based Programs, Systems and/or Structures & Professional Development: 1. All Students, Parents & Families 1. Nov, Mar, June 1. Administration, Teachers, Guidance Counselor, Attendance Aide 1. Award Assemblies: Parents are invited to attend monthly assemblies where student progress and achievement is recognized. Students’ hard work and dedication is recognized with a blue, silver or gold ribbon. Teachers also consider student behavior and effort as selection criteria for receiving a ribbon. Also, the student of the month will be acknowledged for exhibiting positive character traits. 2. Adult ESL Program: Leveled English classes are offered regularly throughout the week (3 days a week) for parents and other adults wishing to learn English. There are morning and evening sessions, each lasting 3 hours. 3. Monthly PTA Meetings: Parents are invited to learn about any new initiatives being adopted by the school and workshops/events being held. It is also a forum for parents and guardians to voice any questions or concerns that they may have. Meetings are held in the mornings and evening on a rotating basis to accommodate parents’ schedules. 4. School Leadership Team (SLT): Parents, teachers, administration and staff work together to improve educational outcomes and determine the school’s educational direction. This committee meets regularly, reflecting on the school’s overall vision, goals, priorities and the strategies and resources that will be used to achieve this mission. 5. Family Incentives: This year, we will introduce new incentives to promote high academic 2. Parents, Community Members 2. Sept-June 2. Administration, Adult Program ESL teachers 3. Parents, Teachers 3. Sept-June 4. All students, Parents/families 5. Students, Parents/families 6. All students, Parents/families 4. Sept-June 5. Nov, Mar, June 3. Administration, Parent Coordinator, Special Events Committee Representative 4. Principal, UFT Chapter Leader, PTA President, SLT Members 6. Dec, April, 7. All students/Parents/families 7. Sept-June 5. Administration, Guidance Counselor, SLT 6. Music teacher, Dance teacher, Science teacher, 4th grade team, 7  achievement and model behavior. Students who receive honor roll will be invited on a trip or will receive a party. Families will be invited to these celebrations. 6. School Events/Performances: Throughout the year, students will be performing in music and dance to showcase what they have learned. Our music and dance teachers collaborate to put together a Winter and Spring musical performance where students in all grades participate. These shows will be open for parents and family members to attend. There will also be a Science Fair, Social Studies Fair, Talent Show and a Theatre Performance (culminating CASA event). 7. Building School Community: Families are invited to join their child on school trips and to volunteer in the classroom or at special events. Also, this year we will have a “Class Parent” who will help share information and promote events amongst the parents. Strategies to Address the Needs of High Need Subgroup: 1. ELLs, SWD, low performing students 1. Sept-June 2. Nov, Jan, Mar, May 3. Sept-June 1. Inclusive, Collaborative Planning: Teachers will work with out of classroom personnel, such as the SETSS provider and the ESL service providers, while planning the interdisciplinary unit plans. These individuals will help identify multiple entry points for ELLs and special education students. Additionally, they will push in and pull out to provide supports for the students in these subgroups. 2. SWD, special education teachers 3. All students 2. Targeted PD: Our SETSS provider will host a workshop series for ICT teachers (on one on) on how to write quality IEPs. During this time, she will meet with the teachers and review the components of the IEP and get help them determine appropriately challenging goals and discuss how to get the students to obtain them. Scaffold Supports: To ensure that all students, including our ELLs, IEP and low performing general education students, are benefiting from instruction, the lessons will include motivational/engagement components throughout the unit of study. Technology will be utilized as a scaffold support, with BrainPop videos and interactive SmartBoard lessons being just some examples of how teachers will Guidance Counselor, CASA teachers, Administration 7. Administration, Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator, Classroom Teachers, Special Events Parent Liaison 1. Administration, Teacher Teams, Guidance Counselor, ENL teachers, SETSS teacher, IEP teacher 2. SETSS teacher, IEP teacher, SBST 3. Classroom teachers, ENL teachers, IEP teacher, SETSS teacher, Administration 8 differentiate lessons. Teachers will plan out questions and tasks prior to ensure they are tiered and address the four DOK levels. Students will also rely on picture supports and manipulatives to help them understand and respond to the tasks. Any worksheets or graphic organizers will be modified to meet the unique needs of these target subgroups. 3. Group Work: Teachers will organize groups according to student levels and will work with them individually as needed. Within these groups, teachers will maintain conferring notes to help them anticipate future needs and to plan their next steps. Strategic ESL Support: Students identified as being SIFE are receiving push in support from the ESL coordinator/teacher throughout the week. She and the classroom teacher work closely to create, monitor and work towards goals for these students. The students are given heavily scaffolded work at their level to meet the lesson and language objectives established. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. RiseBoro Community Partnership Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. A combination of tax levy and reimbursable funding will be allocated to pay for:  Per diem substitutes as teachers meet for planning  Essential materials and resources Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 9  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019, the Special Events Committee will meet with administration to check in on the progress towards meeting this goal. A minimum of 2 culturally centered special events should have been held and/or planned in detail. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The following will be used as measures: Special Events logs of events and parent attendance   Parent Coordinators' log of attendance at workshops  Feedback from the PTA (via school created survey) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) ELLs, SWDs, bottom third performing students; students in grade 3 performing at a 2 level in literacy; students in grades 2-5 performing at a level 1 in ELA ELLs, SWDs and bottom third performing students ELLs, bottom third performing students in 4th grade ELLs, SWDs, bottom third performing students; students in grade 3 performing at a 2 level in literacy IEP and teacher recommendations Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Raz Kids, Myon, Journeys tiered interventions; close reading strategies, interactive writing and explicit teaching of foundational writing skills and the writing process Go Math online skill and concept work, interactive videos and games for reinforcement; center activity work; Bedtime Math App Fusion & FOSS Program Raz Kids, Repeated readings and interactive writing Read alouds targeting social, emotional and behavior development; group discussions on PBIS character traits; interactive writing; Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group intensive, pull out 4 times a week for 50 minute periods during the school day Small group, one to one Small group, one to one Small group; combination of push in an pull out services 4 times a week (during the school day) Small group 4 times a week for 50 minute periods during the school day Small group and/or one-to-one as mandated by child’s IEP 30 minute sessions daily (during school day) 1  engaging activities (crafts, etc.) 2  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We currently have 42 students being identified as having Temporary Housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Teachers are aware and are sensitive to the fact that some of their students may be living in temporary housing and refer children to the guidance counselor if they notice or become aware of any concerns or changes relating to their appearance, behavior or academic performance. Our guidance counselor meets with these students, in a small group or one on one as determined necessary. Additionally, every year these students write letters to Santa around the winter holidays to ask for anything from clothing to toys/games and anything else in between. Teachers who wish to participate in this Secret Santa exchange to help lift these students’ spirits. We ensure that all of these students are prepared for the school year, by providing a school uniform and school supplies. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 3  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 4  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. All teachers are highly qualified. The following structures are in place for recruitment, retention and support of high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified.  Common Planning: These sessions are programmed into every teacher’s schedule, 3 days a week. The focus of  these sessions is for teachers to review their curriculum, plan units and lessons and review student work to make further refinement to the school curriculum. These sessions are an opportunity for horizontal articulation and a means by which to develop next steps as a team. Intervisitations: Teachers are encouraged to visit their colleagues and perform low inference observations with the purpose of seeing best practices. These sessions occur as needed as a result of feedback from administration. Formal observations, instructional snapshots, low inference observations and/or teacher self-selection based on their goals are considered to help determine visits. Additionally, teachers can request to conduct low inference observations as a way of identifying effective strategies.  Core Inquiry Teacher Team Meetings: These sessions allow teachers to come together in a horizontal and vertical manner across the grades to focus on struggling students by reviewing school wide data and identifying student needs. Through the inquiry process, teacher teams set long and short term goals and use protocols for looking at student work. The core team of teachers consists of one member from each teacher team and meets once a month to share best practices from research and to discuss student progress school wide. The team is made up of special education, ESL/Bilingual, and general education teachers.  ESL/Bilingual Team Support PD: Our ESL and bilingual teachers receive strategic professional development once or twice a month. Workshops will be conducted by our ESL coordinator/teacher throughout the year.  New Teacher Mentoring: All new teachers are scheduled to receive mentoring throughout the week from experienced, tenured teachers. During these sessions, they articulate challenges they may be having and establish a plan for addressing these and any other issues. The mentor teacher shares best practices to help the new teachers develop and refine their own teaching style, with effective strategies and approaches for struggling students.  New Teacher PD: All new teachers meet with the principal on a consistent basis for professional development. These sessions are conducted within a small group or on an individual basis depending on the session. The professional development covers a range of topics. At these sessions, the new teachers are encouraged to engage in honest conversation about how they are adjusting, voicing any questions, concerns or comments they may have. 5    Inquiry Planning: Core members will meet on select Tuesdays and possibly afterschool to discuss research based practices that will guide their work with the separate learning targets. Here, data and student work samples are also shared and analyzed. School Implementation Team (SIT): The team is composed of members from the school based support team (SBST), our guidance counselor, SETSS provider and our administrators. They deal directly with tenets of special education reform. They are tasked with developing structures that ensure teachers and providers are trained and supported to safeguard the academic and social success for students with IEPs, reviewing the recommended programs and services of students within the school to ensure appropriate access to the least restrictive environment to the maximum extent possible and creating/implementing a professional development plan for teachers and related service providers. Our SETSS provider serves as the special education liaison. She and the team have developed a protocol for office staff to welcome new families with children who may already have an IEP.  Pupil Personnel Team (PPT): This team meets to discuss cases as they come up and address the issues  surrounding each. Instructional Core Advisory Cabinet: This newly formed committee is composed of administration, classroom teachers (representing the lower grades, upper grades and special education), the ESL coordinator and data specialist. It will meet on a monthly basis to turnkey ideas and consider new initiatives/structures for curriculum and instruction practice.  Positive Behavior Intervention Strategies (PBIS) Committee: These sessions provide team members an opportunity to review school data from sources such as OORS, ATS and I-log to identify areas/staff members in need of school support in the school building and design strategies for improving student behavior and preventing occurrences. Team members work to develop a school wide matrix, chants, pledges, activities, assemblies and programs which motivate students to learn and demonstrate positive behavior. Team members consist of classroom/out of classroom teachers, as well as the guidance counselor, parent coordinator and an administrator in an effort to ensure that all voices are heard and information is disseminated to the school wide community.  Outside Professional Development: These sessions provide participants with the ability to be involved in professional learning at the Network level to learn about new citywide initiatives or to refine content area pedagogy by attending sessions with an instructional specialist. Some of these sessions will take place at colleges or other educational organizations. Participants in these sessions are both teachers are administrators. Administrators may attend outside sessions with teachers to deepen the learning or they may attend outside sessions targeted specifically for the principal or assistant principals. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). All teachers are highly qualified. The following structures are in place for recruitment, retention and support of high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified.  Common Planning: These sessions are programmed into every teacher’s schedule, 3 days a week. The focus of  these sessions is for teachers to review their curriculum, plan units and lessons and review student work to make further refinement to the school curriculum. These sessions are an opportunity for horizontal articulation and a means by which to develop next steps as a team. Intervisitations: Teachers are encouraged to visit their colleagues and perform low inference observations with the purpose of seeing best practices. These sessions occur as needed as a result of feedback from administration. Formal observations, instructional snapshots, low inference observations and/or teacher self-selection based on their goals are considered to help determine visits. Additionally, teachers can request to conduct low inference observations as a way of identifying effective strategies.  Core Inquiry Teacher Team Meetings: These sessions allow teachers to come together in a horizontal and vertical manner across the grades to focus on struggling students by reviewing school wide data and 6  identifying student needs. Through the inquiry process, teacher teams set long and short term goals and use protocols for looking at student work. The core team of teachers consists of one member from each teacher team and meets once a month to share best practices from research and to discuss student progress school wide. The team is made up of special education, ESL/Bilingual, and general education teachers.  ESL/Bilingual Team Support PD: Our ESL and bilingual teachers receive strategic professional development on a bi-monthly basis. To date, workshops have been conducted by our ESL coordinator/teacher and will continue throughout the year.  New Teacher Mentoring: All new teachers are scheduled to receive mentoring throughout the week from experienced, tenured teachers. During these sessions, they articulate challenges they may be having and establish a plan for addressing these and any other issues. The mentor teacher shares best practices to help the new teachers develop and refine their own teaching style, with effective strategies and approaches for struggling students.  New Teacher PD: All new teachers meet with the principal on a consistent basis for professional development.   These sessions are conducted within a small group or on an individual basis depending on the session. The professional development covers a range of topics. At these sessions, the new teachers are encouraged to engage in honest conversation about how they are adjusting, voicing any questions, concerns or comments they may have. Inquiry Planning: Every Monday, our inquiry grade teams meet for inquiry. They discuss research based practices that will guide their work with the separate learning targets. Here, data and student work samples are also shared and analyzed. School Implementation Team (SIT): The team is composed of members from the school based support team (SBST), our guidance counselor, SETSS provider and our administrators. They deal directly with tenets of special education reform. They are tasked with developing structures that ensure teachers and providers are trained and supported to safeguard the academic and social success for students with IEPs, reviewing the recommended programs and services of students within the school to ensure appropriate access to the least restrictive environment to the maximum extent possible and creating/implementing a professional development plan for teachers and related service providers. Our SETSS provider serves as the special education liaison. She and the team have developed a protocol for office staff to welcome new families with children who may already have an IEP.  Pupil Personnel Team (PPT): This team meets to discuss cases as they come up and address the issues  surrounding each. Instructional Core Advisory Cabinet: This newly formed committee is composed of administration, classroom teachers (representing the lower grades, upper grades and special education), the ESL coordinator and data specialist. It will meet on a monthly basis to turnkey ideas and consider new initiatives/structures for curriculum and instruction practice.  Positive Behavior Intervention Strategies (PBIS) Committee: These sessions provide team members an opportunity to review school data from sources such as OORS, ATS and I-log to identify areas/staff members in need of school support in the school building and design strategies for improving student behavior and preventing occurrences. Team members work to develop a school wide matrix, chants, pledges, activities, assemblies and programs which motivate students to learn and demonstrate positive behavior. Team members consist of classroom/out of classroom teachers, as well as the guidance counselor, parent coordinator and an administrator in an effort to ensure that all voices are heard and information is disseminated to the school wide community.  Outside Professional Development: These sessions provide participants with the ability to be involved in professional learning at the Network level to learn about new citywide initiatives or to refine content area pedagogy by attending sessions with an instructional specialist. Some of these sessions will take place at colleges or other educational organizations. Participants in these sessions are both teachers are administrators. Administrators may attend outside sessions with teachers to deepen the learning or they may attend outside sessions targeted specifically for the principal or assistant principals. Part 3: TA Schools Only 7  3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.).  Open House: Parents of preschool children enrolled in early childhood programs are invited to an open house in the Spring. During this time, they visit the kindergarten classrooms and watch as the students engage in a lesson. Afterwards, they are invited to speak with the teachers for a brief question and answer session. Following this, our parent coordinator hosts a wrap up session. There, the guidance counselor, pupil accounting secretary and administration are available to talk with the parents as well.  Turning 5’s: Parents of students with disabilities meet with our school based support team (SBST) staff. The  SBST explains the process for evaluating and, if necessary, placing their child into a special education setting. The IEP process is discussed and any questions or concerns the parents may have are addressed at this time. The ESL coordinator will work with the school psychologist to help identify English language learners. Site Visits: Our parent coordinator visits local preschools in our area beginning in December to speak to staff about how to begin preparing the children for the upcoming school year. She shares information about the CCLS, curriculum and expectations for behavior (social skills). Parents are in attendance and receive a literacy packet to help them work with their child at home (sight words, phonics work, letter tracing and more). The kindergarten application process is explained in detail and parents learn how about how students are assigned to schools based on priority selection criteria. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers are invited to become part of the decision making process regarding assessments. Administration engages in conversation with teacher teams and grade leaders to get their opinion on specific assessments that are currently in use or are being considered. When looking to introduce a new program, teachers are encouraged to research products. When vendors come, all staff is given an opportunity to sit in on meetings and ask questions before 8  completing a survey. The feedback is reviewed by administration and lead teachers before our principal makes a final decision. Grade teams have worked to revise the Journeys and Go Math assessments and curriculum so instruction is more rigorous and aligned to the CCLS. Unit plans are developed based on data analysis to address high areas of need. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 371,753 97,626 13,646 2,539,645 X X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. 9  Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 0  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy School Goals:  To improve the reading and writing levels of our students in K through 5th grade by having parents read to them more non-fiction texts. It can be for the purpose of research, writing a report, completing textbook assignments, personal interest or so on. A series of parent workshops in the areas of reading writing will be conducted.  To strengthen and improve parent participation in children’s education by providing reading, writing and math workshops for parents that are aligned with the Common Core State Standards.  To ensure that high quality programs are provided for all students so that this will enable them to become high achievers and meet and exceed the standards through differentiation of instruction and art infusion. Infusion of art programs for parents in the areas of museums, Broadway shows and off Broadway Theatre to ensure content knowledge.  School Activities:  Convene an annual meeting for parents of participating students to explain the Title I program and activities. Parents will be informed of their right to be involved.  Offer a flexible number of meetings with parents before, during or after the school day. 1   Involve parents in the joint development of school wide program plans through participation of a school-based planning and decision-making committee.  To improve communication between parents and school though letters, flyers, newsletters, etc.  Submit to the ISC (Integrated Service Center) instances of school-wide program plans that are deemed unsatisfactory to parents.  Provide parents with timely information about programs, including school performance profiles; their child’s individual student assessment results; a description of the curriculum, forms of assessment and the proficiency levels that students are expected to meet; opportunities for regular meetings to formulate suggestions and share experiences; and timely responses to their suggestions. Jointly develop with parents a school-parent compact that outlines how parents, staff and students will share responsibility for improved student achievement and explain how they will work as partners to enable participating students to meet the high standards.   To provide parents with the opportunity to participate in school sponsored workshops on appropriate  subjects, i.e., literacy classes, reading strategies, math, homework, etc. In order to work with students at P.S 86K, parents must attend a series of three workshops provided by Learning Leaders. Once parents fulfill all requirements provided by Learning Leaders and receive a certificate then he/she can volunteer at the school. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students  Convene an annual meeting for parents of participating students to explain the Title I program and activities. Parents will be informed of their right to be involved.  Offer a flexible number of meetings with parents before, during or after the school day.  Involve parents in the joint development of school wide program plans through participation of a school-based planning and decision-making committee.  To provide parents with the opportunity to participate in school sponsored workshops on appropriate subjects, i.e., literacy classes, reading strategies, math, homework, etc. Parental Involvement and School Quality   Submit to the ISC (Integrated Service Center) instances of school-wide program plans that are deemed unsatisfactory to parents. Jointly develop with parents a school-parent compact that outlines how parents, staff and students will share responsibility for improved student achievement and explain how they will work as partners to enable participating students to meet the high standards.  Provide parents with timely information about programs, including school performance profiles; their child’s individual student assessment results; a description of the curriculum, forms of assessment and the proficiency levels that students are expected to meet; opportunities for regular meetings to formulate suggestions and share experiences; and timely responses to their suggestions.  To improve the reading and writing levels of our students in K through 5 th grade by having parents read to them more non-fiction texts. It can be for the purpose of research, writing a report, completing textbook assignments, personal interest or so on. A series of parent workshops in the areas of reading writing will be conducted. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement To improve communication between parents and school though letters, flyers, newsletters, etc. 2  In order to work with students at P.S 86K, parents must attend a series of three workshops provided by Learning Leaders. Once parents fulfill all requirements provided by Learning Leaders and receive a certificate then he/she can volunteer at the school. To strengthen and improve parent participation in children’s education by providing reading, writing and math workshops for parents that are aligned with the Common Core State Standards. The school and parents working cooperatively to provide for the successful education of the children agree: School-Parent Compact (SPC) The school agrees:  To convene an annual meeting for Title I parents in inform them of the Title I program and their right to be involved.  To offer a flexible number of meetings at various times, and if necessary, and if funds are available, to provide transportation, childcare and home visits for those parents who cannot attend a regular school meeting otherwise.  To actively involve parents in planning, reviewing and improving Title I programs and the parental involvement policy.  To provide parents with timely information about all programs.  To provide performance profiles of each individual student.  To provide assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual and school district education information. Frequent reports to parents on their children’s progress  To provide high quality curriculum instruction.  To deal with communication issues between teachers and parents through:  Parent-teacher conferences, annually at minimum   Reasonable access to staff  Opportunities to volunteer and participate in their child’s class  Observation of classroom activities  To assure that parents may participate in professional development activities if the school determines that it is appropriate; i.e., literacy classes, workshops on reading strategies The parents agree:  To become involved in developing, implementing, evaluating and revising the school-parent involvement policy.  To participate in or request technical assistance training that the local education authority or school offers on child rearing practices and teaching and learning strategies.  To work with his/her child/children on school work: to read for 15 to 30 minutes a day to Kindergarten and 1st grade students; listen to 2nd and 3rd grade students read for 15 to 30 minutes a day.  To make sure that his/her child/children complete their homework.  To be responsible for making sure his/her child attends school on a regular daily basis.  To monitor the television programs that their child/children watch.  To communicate with his/her child’s/children’s teachers about their educational needs. 3   To ask parents and parent groups to provide information to the school on the type of training or assistance they would like and/or need to help them be more effective in assisting their child/children in the educational process. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum  To improve the reading and writing levels of our students in K through 5 th grade by having parents read to them more non-fiction texts. It can be for the purpose of research, writing a report, completing textbook assignments, personal interest or so on. A series of parent workshops in the areas of reading writing will be conducted.  To ensure that high quality programs are provided for all students so that this will enable them to become high achievers and meet and exceed the standards through differentiation of instruction and art infusion. Infusion of art programs for parents in the areas of museums, Broadway shows and off Broadway Theatre to ensure content knowledge.  I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships The school, working cooperatively to provide for the successful education of the children agrees: To convene an annual meeting for Title I parents in inform them of the Title I program and their right to be involved.  To offer a flexible number of meetings at various times, and if necessary, and if funds are available, to provide transportation, childcare and home visits for those parents who cannot attend a regular school meeting otherwise.  To actively involve parents in planning, reviewing and improving Title I programs and the parental involvement policy.  To provide parents with timely information about all programs.  To provide performance profiles of each individual student.  To provide assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual and school district education information.  To provide high quality curriculum instruction.  To deal with communication issues between teachers and parents through:  Parent-teacher conferences, annually at minimum  Frequent reports to parents on their children’s progress  Reasonable access to staff  Opportunities to volunteer and participate in their child’s class 4   Observation of classroom activities  To assure that parents may participate in professional development activities if the school determines that it is appropriate; i.e., literacy classes, workshops on reading strategies. I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff The school commits to offering a flexible number of meetings at various times, and if necessary, and if funds are available, to provide transportation, childcare and home visits for those parents who cannot attend a regular school meeting otherwise. Also, the school commits to dealing with communication issues between teachers and parents through: Frequent reports to parents on their children’s progress  Parent-teacher conferences, annually at minimum   Reasonable access to staff  Opportunities to volunteer and participate in their child’s class  Observation of classroom activities I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents The school commits to providing parents with timely information about all programs. Parents can seek out general support via the parent coordinator, guidance counselor, administration and/or teachers and support staff. The parents, working cooperatively to provide for the successful education of the children agrees: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  To become involved in developing, implementing, evaluating and revising the school-parent involvement policy.  To participate in or request technical assistance training that the local education authority or school offers on child rearing practices and teaching and learning strategies.  To work with his/her child/children on school work: to read for 15 to 30 minutes a day to Kindergarten and 1st grade students; listen to 2 nd and 3 rd grade students read for 15 to 30 minutes a day.  To make sure that his/her child/children complete their homework.  To be responsible for making sure his/her child attends school on a regular daily basis.  To monitor the television programs that their child/children watch.  To communicate with his/her child’s/children’s teachers about their educational needs.  To ask parents and parent groups to provide information to the school on the type of training or assistance they would like and/or need to help them be more effective in assisting their child/children in the educational process. III. Student Responsibilities Students are responsible for doing their homework and reading at home daily. They are also tasked with coming to school every day on time, prepared with all necessary materials to learn. They are to come to school with a mentality 5  and attitude of being ready to work hard and to try their best. They are to conduct themselves in a appropriate and responsible manner always, treating their peers and all adults witth respect. 6  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 7  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The rationale for offering the After School ELL Academy is that small group instruction will help to strengthen targeted areas as seen in the analysis of the ongoing data collected by teachers, Spring NYSESLAT and the 2018 ELA. The main goal is language development. The school wide focus for the 2018 – 2019 school year is: Fostering student discussion to advance student vocabulary acquisition and improve writing. Based on the assessment of the NYSESLAT and ELA (Spring 2017), our ELLs struggle with reading comprehension in the areas of vocabulary in context and using inference skills to explain the text evidence. We want to use the students' strength in listening/speaking to enrich their reading/writing by tapping into prior knowledge while increasing their ability to analyze and comprehend academic vocabulary in context. All ELLs in grades 1-5 are invited to attend the After School ELL Academy. The program will be offered to a total of 95 students in grades 1-5: The students will be divided into 8 small groups, including one non graded newcomer first year ELL group and a grade 2/3 Self-contained IEP group. This program will be held Wednesdays from 2:30-4:30 for 15 weeks and will be taught by 8 ESL/BIlingual certified teachers. We would like to decrease the number of students who are scoring at Expanding level for multiple years without achieving proficiency. With this in mind instruction will target academic language growth focusing on nonfiction and academic vocabulary. The program will be held on Wednesdays, with the tentative dates being January 9th, 2019 - May 8th, 2019. The language of instruction will be English with scaffolds and interventions in Spanish as needed. The materials are supplemental and are not used during daily instruction. Materials are at cost to Title III. The materials to be used will be Getting Ready for NYSESLAT by Attanasio & Associates, Inc. NYSESLAT shifts are now Common Core Aligned and is based on the New Language Arts Progressions of the Bilingual Common Core Initiative. With this in mind Getting Ready for NYSESLAT includes "question on broad-based themes which are global in focus and questions that integrate the modalities of listening, reading and writing. The speaking section contains items with grade-appropriate content that requires a greater use of academic language." The program will continue until school year 2019 -2020. Additionally, Reading A-Z online reading program subscription will be purchased at cost to Title III. This will allow teachers access to reading materials with high interest and picture support at students’ levels. Success of this Academy will be measured in multiple ways: 1. Data Analysis and the ELL Data Analysis Tool (EDAT) for the Spring 2019 administration of NYSESLAT and NYS ELA exams. 2. Initial Mock NYSESLAT 3. Summative program Mock NYSESLAT. 4. Teacher ongoing observations. Program notifications will be sent home in English and parent preferred language. Teachers will take attendance and track it daily. These records will be collected and filed in the main office along with other CR Part 154 compliance files. 8  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Student Schedule 2:30 – 3:10 Reading/Speaking, 3:15 – 4:30 Writing/Listening A total of 8 teachers will be employed in the Title III program. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Professional development is ongoing. The rationale is that since data is fluid and constantly changing then high quality, rigorous instruction is the goal. Therefore, professional development is an integral component of this program. The professional development theme is Engaging ALL students in Rigorous Instruction and discussion. All teachers, and all staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs and Title III Program teachers will be involved in the following professional development sessions: Assessing Reading Comprehension, Rigor and Student Engagement, Guided Reading and Small Group Instruction, Using Data To Drive Instruction, and writing effectively using text evidence. Each PD cycle will be six week cycles to allow for action research. The teachers who teach the Title III program will be specifically trained in once monthly per session meetings, for a total of 5 one hour sessions. These per session trainings will be at cost to Title III. These topics to include using the modality data analysis to drive small group instruction and strategies to use for the acquisition of academic vocabulary. Professional Development sessions will be facilitated by Administrators, certified Bil/ENL staff and Brooklyn North Field Support staff. The certified ESL/bilingual teachers who will be facilitators will be attending PDs offered throughout the year at the Brooklyn North Field Support Center. Professional development will be facilitated by Dr. Moschella (principal), Ms. Rivera (AP), Ms. Mingo (Universal Literacy Coach) and Amy Sauer, (Literacy coach grades 3-5). The tentative PD schedule is as outlined below: December 5 | Close Reading (Action Research) / Facilitated by Grade Team Leaders December 12 | Close Reading (Action Research) / Facilitated by Grade Team Leaders December 19 | Close Reading / Facilitated by Administrators & Grade Team Leaders January 23 | Using Data to Drive Instruction / Facilitated by Grade Team Leaders January 30 | Data Reflections & Next Steps / Facilitated by Administrators & Grade Team Leaders February 6 | Writing Effectively Using Text Evidence / Facilitated by Literacy Coach February 13 | Writing Effectively Using Text Evidence / Facilitated by Literacy Coach February 27 | Close Reading: Action Research / Facilitated by Grade Team Leaders & ESL/bilingual certified teachers March 6 | Close Reading: Action Research / Facilitated by Grade Team Leaders March 13 | Close Reading: Action Research / Facilitated by Grade Team Leaders March 20 | Close Reading: Action Research / Facilitated by Grade Team Leaders 9  Part C: Professional Development March 27 | Close Reading: Action Research / Facilitated by Administration, Grade Team Leaders April 3 | Miscue Analysis / Facilitated by Grade Team Leaders April 24 | Miscue Analysis / Facilitated by Grade Team Leaders May 1 | Miscue Analysis / Facilitated by Grade Team Leaders All PD sessions will be held on Mondays from 2:30-3:30 at no cost to the Title III program. These PD sessions noted above are ongoing – with a tentative starting date of Mondays, 2:30 – 3:40 beginning in September 2018 and continuing to June 2019. The Tuesday breakout sessions will specifically be geared toward the Title III teachers with topics in progress monitoring and incorporating NYSESLAT 2018 data in afterschool instruction. These sessions will be once monthly, beginning in November 2018 and ending in April 2019. Each session will be for 50 minutes. This is at no cost to title III. Agendas and attendance sheets will be filed with all other CR Part 154 compliance files in the ENL coordinator’s office. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: It is our belief that if the home and school work together, student achievement can improve. An invitation will be sent in the home language to the parents of all students in grades K-5 to participate in the workshops. Translations will be provided via the Translation Unit for low incidence languages. Additionally, we also use our translation team at school made up of staff members. Records such as agendas, sign in sheets and handouts will be maintained in the parent coordinator's office. Additionally, the monthly school newsletter, published in both English and Spanish, will include information about the various workshops offered. Workshops begin at 8:30 AM and end at 10:30 AM. They are facilitated by Ms. Maria Mendez, parent coordinator and various community based organizations. Parents will be taught how to explore community resources and access these resources. The first series of workshops for parents begin in October with Brooklyn Reads 365. CAMBA will present on the issues of housing and immigration. The NYC Health Department on November 30 will conduct a workshop on lead poisoning prevention and healthy homes. The Puerto Rican Family Institute will offer advice on parenting skills in January. The Brooklyn Coalition will discuss domestic violence and awareness. NYDOT will talk about safety education and Vision Zero Initiative. NY Psychotherapy and counselling will offer insights into ADHD, bullying and communicating with children. Stress management workshops will be offered. The goal here is to help parents see the connection between the school, the community and students’ learning/achievement. These community based resources are free to all. ESL classes are offered Monday to Friday, 8:30 AM - 12:30 PM and Tuesdays and Thursdays 6:30 - 8:30 PM. There will be 3 cultural trips for parents at no cost to Title III. The refreshments for the parents will be at cost to Title III. 0 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 1  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 32 School Name The Irvington Borough Brooklyn School Number 086 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Dr. Tina Moschella Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Mrs. C. English - Marshall Teacher/Subject Area Ms. C. Shaw, ENL/Common Branch Teacher/Subject Area Ms. E. Alvarez, Bil Related-Service Provider Ms. H. Amsterdam, SETTS Superintendent type here Assistant Principal Ms. Patricia Rivera Coach type here School Counselor Ms. J. Bautista Parent Ms. Lorena Canuto, PTA pres. Parent Coordinator Ms. M. Mendez Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) Ms. Monica Bojaca, teacher/Bil C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 2 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 1 1 D. Student Demographics 2  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 381 Total number of ELLs 132 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 34.65% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Yes NoFreestanding ENL Yes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K Span 4 1 3 2 2017-18 1 1 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school uses Fountas & Pinnell to assess the literacy skills of our ELL students. This is administered in November, March and June. ELLs in the Dual Language program are administered both Spanish and English Fountas and Pinnell assessments. Teachers test the students individually to determine their individual reading level, noting fluency, accuracy and comprehension levels. Writing is assessedth on demand writing tasks as formative and summative evaluation at the beginning and end of each writing unit. GoMath end of chapter and end of unit tests are used to assess progress in math. Daily conferring/assessment notes are kept by each teacher in each subject area. NYSESLAT modality data is used to inform student language needs. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3  The structures that are in place to support this effort include data, weekly grade level team meetings with supervisors. There will be one area of focus each week - reading writing or math data. Teachers will share assessment data and grouping information for that subject. Discussion will follow the same protocol each week - using data to design meaning instruction. Additionally, enquiry teams meet weekly to examine student work and analyse data. All data is shared with service providers. A Google Docs. account has been established to facilitate this collaboration. Groupings are posted in each classroom indicating the assessment used to inform each group. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The NYSESLAT data is analyzed, using the EDAT tool, to identify student strengths and weaknesses. The school administers baseline GoMath and Journeys Reading assessments at the beginning and end of the school year. ELA and Math mock exams are administered in fall and spring. These assessments help us to analyze trends for which goals are established, action plans and focus instruction are then created. The school report card is also considered when developing areas and subgroups for targeted action. The EDAT Tool gives an even clearer idea as to whether or not the school has met its EDAT goals. This data is used when making critical decisions about interventions, inquiry/RTI, professional development needs and in creating new programs. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the summative data has been gathered the RTI plan is then put in place: working with enquiry teams to examine student work products and plan next steps meeting with service providers to share and discuss next steps Weekly data meetings with supervisors where data is examined and analyzed PD with literacy coaches to help identify and plan for targeted instruction small group differentiation, with explicit scaffolded instruction in classroom SPIRE program in SETTS AIS with our Literacy teacher 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] RtI is an instructional model that aims at prevention and intervention through a tiered system of support. RtI is a general education initiative that involves the whole school but to help meet the specific needs of our ELLs, teachers are cognizant of who their ELLs are and strategically place them in small groups for focused, scaffolded support. RTI is then putin place: working with enquiry teams to examine student work products and plan next steps meeting with service providers to share and discuss next steps Weekly data meetings with supervisors where data is examined and analyzed PD with literacy coaches to help identify and plan for targeted instruction small group differentiation, with explicit scaffolded instruction in classroom SPIRE program in SETTS AIS with our Literacy teacher 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. A combination of NYSESLAT, State ELA and State Math results are used to evaluate and inform the ELL programs. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Teachers meet at beginning of school year to analyze the data. This analysis is ongoing Part IV: ELL Programming 4  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Students in the Freestanding ENL program are grouped heterogeneously by grade level classes with mixed proficiency levels. They are serviced by a certified ESL teacher who collaborates with the Common Branch certified teacher to analyze data and plan best practices for co-teaching to the New CR Part 154 mandates. The organizational models are as follows:Kindergarten: Dual Language and ENL pull out model. 1st Grade: ENL push in model2nd Grade: ENL self-contained and ENL pull out/push in model3rd Grade: ENL push in/pull out model 4th Grade: ENL push in/pull out model5th Grade: ENL push in/pull out modelEntering students are entitled to a minimum of 360 minutes of ENL weekly. This breaks down to 180 minutes of standalone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL. Emerging students are entitled to a minimum of 90 minutes of standalone ENL, 180 minutes of which is standalone ENL and another 90 minutes of either standalone or integrated. Transitioning students are entitled to 180 minutes of integrated and/or standalone ENL. Students scoring at the Expanding level are entitled to 180 minutes of integrated ENL. The Commanding level students are entitled to 90 minutes of integrated ENL, ELA or other content area instruction. b. TBE program. If applicable. P.S. 86 does not offer a TBE program at this time. c. DL program. If applicable. The Dual Language program is self-contained with English proficient students and English Language Learners (of different proficiency levels) learning side by side in a roller coaster language model (one day Spanish is taught all day, next day English is taught all day). The ELLs in the DL model are serviced in accordance with CR Part 154 requirements. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? To ensure that all the students are receiving explicit ENL, ELA & NLA mandated instructional minutes we have flexible scheduling of self-contained, push-in and pull-out services. This involves all certified ESL and Bilingual teachers working collaboratively to comply with CR Part 154.2 mandates. Entering students are entitled to a minimum of 360 minutes of ENL weekly. This breaks down to 180 minutes of standalone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL. Emerging students are entitled to a minimum of 90 minutes of standalone ENL, 180 minutes of which is standalone ENL and another 90 minutes of either standalone or integrated. Transitioning students are entitled to 180 minutes of integrated and/or standalone ENL. Students scoring at the Expanding level are entitled to 180 minutes of integrated ENL. The Commanding level students are entitled to 90 minutes of integrated ENL, ELA or other content area instruction. In the Dual Language program the bilingual teacher delivers the instructional minutes to the entitled students. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The science and social studies curriculum follows the New York City Scope and Sequence. Work is being done through Inquiry to continue to align both to the Common Core State Standards and curriculum maps. This program uses hands-on projects and experiments to teach the content and academic vocabulary. Writing within the content areas is also emphasized, as well as differentiation within small group instruction. There is a strong empahsis on developing academic vocabulary, summarizing content and close reading strategies. Students are given content based performance tasks. The Journeys reading program is used in grades K-5. Teachers have access to the following resources: Teacher's Edition, Teacher Gateway, Interactive Whiteboard Lessons, Grab and Go!, Student Books, Online Assessments, Professional Development Videos and myWrite Smart 5  Journals. These resources are also available in Spanish. Students are assigned passwords for Think Central so they can have access at school, but also at home to assined tasks and reading in Spanish and English. Go Math is used in all classrooms. All materials are CCLS aligned. Content areas support for ELLs is provided through heavy collaborative team teaching with the push in model. Scaffold supports are provided for students in the form of background building/building schema, explicit vocabulary instruction, picture supports and targeted, scaffolded differentiated instruction. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students in the DL program will be administered the Spanish Fountas & Pinnell kit in November, March and June. Estrellita (Spanish phonics program)ensures that students are assessed regularly for basic Spanish literacy. GoMath assessments are available in Spanish. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status SIFE students have been identified this school year as per Department of Education guidelines. The instructional plan for these students is as follows:• Pushing in to primary grade Estrellita Native Language phonics in order to build basic foundation in the Native Language.• Peer partnering with students who have Native Language literacy.• Close reading aligned to the Common Core State Standards using scaffolding strategies• Title III Afterschool ELL Academy (for vocabulary and literacy development)• Ongoing data collection and analysis through formal/informal assessment (GoMath! assessments, , daily/weekly conferral notes, Fountas & Pinnell running records, quizzes and portfolios)• Native Language Arts instruction through a certified bilingual teacher (in primary grades) Newcomer:• Intensive English Language development during literacy block Estrellita or Paso Su Paso for basic Native Language Literacy Targeted instruction based on student individual needs as seen from NYSESLAT/NYSITELL/ and other assessments• Title III supplementary programs in Math, Science and Literacy• Close reading aligned to the Common Core State Standards • Parent Workshops that inform parents about resources and expectations• Small group instruction• Ongoing data collection and analysis via formal/informal assessment (GoMath! assessments, RALLY Mock Assessments, daily/weekly conferral notes, Fountas & Pinnell running records, NYC Performance Task, quizzes and portfolios)• Native Language Arts instruction through a certified bilingual teacher (if in DL class)• Leveled libraries as well as Native language libraries. Developing: • Title III ELL Academy (for academic vocabulary development, State ELA, Math, and NYSESLAT preparation.)• Using data analysis to drive instruction• ENL push-in to support classroom curriculum• Ongoing data collection and analysis through formal/informal assessment (GoMath! assessments, RALLY Mock Assessments, daily/weekly conferral notes, Fountas & Pinnell running records, NYC Performance Tasks Long Term ELLs: • Title III ELL Academy (for academic vocabulary development, State ELA, Math, and second language literacy)• Using data analysis to drive instruction• ENL push-in to support classroom curriculum• Ongoing data collection and analysis via formal/informal assessment (GoMath! assessments, RALLY Mock Assessments, daily/weekly conferral notes, Fountas & Pinnell running records, NYC Performance Task, quizzes and portfolios)• Inquiry RTI/AIS intervention Former ELLs:• Push-In ENL teacher support for at minimum 90 minutes weekly in an integrated model• Examination of NYSESLAT modality results to identify areas that could still use improvement• Inquiry•Continued use of testing accommodations: bilingual glossaries, simultaneous use of English and aternate language editions (not ELA), oral translation of lower incidence language (not ELA), writing responses in Native Language (not ELA), separate location Title III afterschool programs - Science, Math, Literacy 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? 6  Daily conferring notes ensures that teachers are conducting ongoing assessment. • Regular review of student’s IEP to examine language goals• Small group and individual instruction• Collaboration between ICT, General Education, Special Education, and English as a Second Language teachers• Using data analysis to drive instruction• Title III ELL Academy (for vocabulary development, State ELA, Math, and second language literacy skills.All classes use grade level Journeys Common Core Reading program, Go!Math and TC for Writing Units of Study, Science Fusion (Think Central)Additionally, the online program MYON was purchased for all students. This program tracks reading levels in English and Spanish. It has a vocabulary and listening component. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The IEP team meets monthly to review IEPs, evaluate placement, student progress and instruction. This team consists of a school psychologist, IEP teacher, SETTS, classroom, ESL, related service providers and social worker. They consider the least restrictive setting when they evaluate the IEP. ELL-SWDs students are sometimes mainstreamed into monolingual/general education classes with a certified ESL teacher where possible. This is based on data and student progress. The school meets the diverse needs of ELL - SWDs by making sure that all students are taught with high standards and that rigor is maintained using ESL strategies. All ELLs are serviced by ESL/Bilingual certified teachers. Teachers meet for planning and articulation during the weekly data meetings with supervisors, weekly inquiry team meetings and weekly common preps. All ELLs receive curricula materials aligned to CCLS for the grade levels. ESL strategies and methodologies are implemented to guide the instruction. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ELLs who score at the high to low level 2s on State Math and State ELA are targeted for inquiry. During the classroom based inquiry intervention students receive targeted instruction in small group.There is a science enrichment program which will target 4th grade ELLs. Additionally, STEM Title III afterschool program will target 3rd grade ELLs. The science focus for this year will be rich academic concept vocabulary development and hands on experiments that help with oral academic vocabulary. Title III ELL Academy will focus on developing vocabulary skills in reading and writing. A writing intervention afterschool program will start in November and extend to May 2018 for grades 3, 4 and 5. The Math after school program targets gaps while helping to develop mathematical practices in grades 2 - 5. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? A Dual Language program will be opened this school year, beginning in kindergarten and extending to other grades in the next years. Regular, consistent physical education is being offered to all students. We will pilot the computer based reading program - MYON. Students have access to levelled reading materials at school and at home on any device in any language. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? The TBE was closed because of low enrollment of students in the program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. The school motto is that, "All students can learn and exceed the standards. Al l programs focus on increasing fluency, academic vocabulary, comprehension, writing and mathematical concepts in order to increase achievement in all subject areas. AIS/RTI services are ongoing and reflect the use of data to determine intervention needs. Inquiry is classroom based and targets specific literacy needs. There is a science enrichment program which will target 4th grade ELLs. Additionally, STEM Title III afterschool program will target 3rd grade ELLs. The science focus for this year will be rich academic concept vocabulary development and hands on experiments that help with oral academic vocabulary. Title III ELL Academy will focus on developing vocabulary skills in reading and writing. A writing intervention afterschool program will start in November and extend to May 2018 for grades 3, 4 and 5. The Math after school program targets gaps while helping to develop mathematical practices in grades 2 - 5. Flyers and letters go home in parents preferred language to inform and request permision for students to attend where necessary. 7  12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Think Central.com provides the technology component, CCLS aligned, to the Journeys reading program and GOMath program and all teachers have access. All students are given passwords to access in school or at home differentiated or assigned tasks. In GoMath they can accessmath enrichment, interventions, videos on skills. In the Journeys Reading program students can be assigned to reading leveled books and or vocabulary assignments/assessments. MYON is an online reading program which was purchased to help track students’ reading levels with targeted practice. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Dual Language class is taught by a bilingual certified classroom teacher. In the DL classes HL is assessed using Spanish Fountas and Pinnell, three times per year. Estrellita (Spanish Phonics) has on going assessment for Native Language basic literacy.Each ESL classroom has a bilingual library. Teachers use cognates (when possible). They tap into their students’ first language (and where the teacher speaks the first language, prior background knowledge is elicited in their first language). Guided Reading Books from Journeys are available in Spanish and students can listen to select stories online in Spanish. MYON reading program is available in Spanish. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Supports are based on age and are the appropriate level. Students receive their minimum mandated services based on Part 154 mandates. All teachers are aware of NYSESLAT scores and group accordingly. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? P. S 86 does not share a building. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). In April and June the Parent Coordinator facilitates two workshops where she invites parents of incoming students to participate in hands-on activities that support pre-literacy skills. Parents are invited to an Open House at the school. Parents for incoming kindergateners are invited to an open house tour prior to the start of the new school year. They are able to sit in a kindergarten class, observe the activities and ask questions about the program.There is a Special Events Committee, made up of teachers and other school personnel, that organizes events throughout the school year. Math Night, Movie and popcorn, Mommy and me Dance, Fall Festival with a pumpkin patch, Christmas Town, Book Fairs, Spring Dances and Craft Night to name a few of the activities that are offered throughout the year. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? P.S 86 is an elementary school. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? The DL model used is self-contained in a roller coaster setting. The EPs and ELLs are together 100% of the time - except where instruction is being differentiated in small groups. Since we are using the roller coaster model students will receive core content area instruction in both languages, depending on the day. On Spanish day all instruction is delivered in Spanish in all subject areas - except for preps- which are 8  taught in English. Emergent literacy is taught simultaneously using the Estrellita Spanish phonics program and Fundations for emergent English. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional development is a continuous process of examination and improvement of practice in this building. ELL training is given to all staff ( this includes ESL/Bilingual certified teachers, Common branch, paraprofessionals, guidance counselors, special education teachers, psychologist, OT/PT, speech therapist, secretaries, parent coordinator). These sessions are provided through in-house training sessions such as cross grade and cross subject planning and through workshops attended outside of the school. The PD plan includes the following: on going modeling by certified ESL teachers, faculty/grade conferences, ELL monthly institue, intense teacher institue for ESL and/or bilingual certification, student research based on inquiry team work and P.D. offerings from OELL. Additionally, the PD team and administrators have created a PD plan which includes specific PD in 6 weeek cycles for specific teacher teams. Cycle 1 - vocabulary, cycle 2 - close reading for key details, cycle 3 - writing effectively using text evidence. Questioning and student discussion strategies are embedded in all cycles. These teacher teams meet weekly to analyze data, student work and lesson/unit plans all to drive instruction. The professional development is differentiated based on need, experience, program and current student data. Teachers are polled for their professional development needs which are then assessed by the administrators. PD is then organized based on formal/informal observations and teachers' personal need. This year's professional development will focus on teaching academic vocabulary using close reading, read alouds and guided reading small group, text complexity, incorporating reading, writing, listening and speaking throughout the entire curriculum and high quality questioning techniques. Additionally, the PD team and administrators have created a PD plan which includes specific PD in 6 weeek cycles for specific teacher teams. Questioning and student discussion strategies are embedded in all cycles. These teacher teams meet weekly to analyze data, student work and lesson/unit plans all to drive instruction. Bilingual and ESL vertical team meets monthly to analyze trends in student work and data. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. CR Part 80 states that a minimum of 15 % of PD for all teachers should be dedicated to language acquisition and 50% of the PD sessions for Bilingual and ENL teachers should be dedicated to language acquisition with core content area instruction and how to integrate these two areas. A series of school wide PDs (one monthly) for the ENL/bilingual teachers will focus on academic language acquisition as it relates to content area instruction. Additionally, Brooklyn North Field Support Center offers year long institutes to support all teachers of ELLs. Teachers at this school are enrolled to attend the ones related to language and content area instruction. Weekly data meetings with supervisors, common preps and inquiry work ensures that all teachers of ELLs are regularly involved in the analysis of data which requires research based methodologies to alter instruction as needed. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 9  Progress reports are sent and meetings are made to individually discuss student progress. During parent engagement block on Tuesdays, 2: 20 - 3:00, teachers schedule meetings with the parents of ELLs to discuss language development progress, language development needs in all content areas. Interpretation and translation services provided by translation unit and specific staff who are able to translate. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The Special Events Committee creates school wide activities for the parents - Math night, literacy night, Father/Daughter dance, Fall Literacy Festival, Craft Night, Dinner with Parent and Teacher night. All these activities are translated into the Native Language to encourage maximum participation. Parents are involved in our school through a number of workshops. Weekly workshops are provided in the areas of literacy, math, science, social studies, homework help, health issues, and fatherhood workshops. Literacy/ELA night, math night are offered in translations for parents in their preferred language. At these annual fairs the entire family is invited to a fun night of games, workshops and refreshments. Parents are invited to the ELL Academy to sit next to their child for an hour before they attend ESL classes for an hour. The parent coordinator plans cultural trips to museums and Broadway plays annually. Addtionally, parents are kept informed about school activities with a monthly Parent Newsletter. To support staff to assist ELLs as they transition from one school level to another the guidance counselor gives an orientation to the fifth grade students and their parents about all programs offered at junior high schools including ESL services and related language programs. A follow up trip for parents and students is then taken to the middle schools for an open house tour. The parent coordinator offers workshop that are geared toward helping parents navigate the school system after elementary school. Additionally, representatives are invited from local schools to give more information to parents and students. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 0 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Tina Moschella Andre, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 1  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Irvington School DBN: 32BK08 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 32BK86 School Name: The Irvington Superintendent: Lilian Druck The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Data about language needs is collected from ATS report of Preferred Language, the Blue Cards, Parent Surveys and Teacher surveys. Six languages other than English have been identified in this school (RHLA, RPOB - ATS). P.S.86K has a group of dedicated staff that is responsible for providing interpretation services to those parents whose primary language is other than English. A translation and interpretation team was created. Team members include school staff, parent volunteers and the Translation Unit is contacted as needed. The goal of this team is to ensure that parent communication is done in the language that parent request. When a child is enrolled at the school, parents are asked to specify their primary language on the child’s emergency card. Parents language preference is also identified on the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) completed upon registration of newly enrolled students to the NYC school system. The ESL certified teacher then assigns a language code based on HLIS responses. This code is recorded in ATS by the Pupil accounting secretary. Home Language Identification Surveys are ordered for all languages. Parents receive information in English, Spanish or other language preferences, regarding their child’s education through school notices, phone conversations, as well as formal or 3  informal meetings. There are monthly parent meetings facilitated by our bilingual parent coordinator. The school uses bilingual staff, volunteer parents and Translation Unit to help with our translation needs. We also utilize an automated messaging system that calls students' homes in parent language preference to notify parents of important messages from the school. We rely on 2 ATS reports - RHLA and RPOB - for data on translation and interpretation needs of our students and families. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Spanish, Arabic, Chinese, Bengali, American Sign Language, Tibetan,and Urdu. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Monthly Newsletter,Calendars of upcoming activities, bi-annual progress reports, trip information, parent/teacher conferences, report cards and comments, invitation to special events like our Fall Festival, weekly parent workshops, after school program information, New York Testing dates, school closing announcements. These notices are generally sent home a week in advance of the event. 4  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Tuesday afternoons (2:20 - 3:00) are designated as parent engagement time - parents request meeting with teachers and vice versa. Parent/teacher conferences occur twice each year. Teachers who will need translators notify the team prior to this meeting. Two parent/teacher conferences are scheduled for November and March. Open school evenings are scheduled for fall and spring.Parents of ELLs are scheduled for 1 additional face to face with teachers annually. ASL interpreter is always present at any event and is provided by the Translation Unit. This unit needs one month advance notice. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) As per Regulation A-663, the parents of P.S.86K are provided every year with a copy of The Parents Bill of Rights and Responsibility in English as well as in the parent’s language preference (primary language). The translation team 5  (made up of in house school staff) translates documents/memos prior to the date needed. They assess the need and determine if and when the Translation Unit will be consulted. If the Unit is needed that agency is notified 4 weeks prior to date needed. All notices are posted in the primary languages of our parents by the main entrance of the school. Our safety plan contains procedures that ensure that those parents in need of translation are assisted when it is needed. Forms regarding translation services are posted in different locations. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent feedback is encouraged. The bilingual parent coordinator gives formal and informal surveys to assess how well parents' needs are being met. Parent responses from annual parent surveys are used to assess parent needs. Parent represetative on the school leadership team present parent feedback to the team. 6 
