 13K093 School Name: P.S. 093 WILLIAM H. PRESCOTT Principal: JANEICE BAILEY   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: William H. Prescott 331300010093 PreK-5 th 31 New York Ave. 718-604-7363 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 13K093 718-771-1369 Fax: JaneiceBailey jbailey3@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: JaneiceBailey Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Sherrian Brown-Auguiste Ebonie Reddick SherrianBrowne-Auguiste SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Salina Jordan NA N/A NA Geographical District: 13 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Kamar Samuels Superintendent: 355 Park Place Brooklyn, NY 11238 ZCooper@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-636-3284 Phone Number: 718-636-3266 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Brooklyn North Bernadette Fitzgerald FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 131 Livingston St. bfitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-3954 Phone Number: 718-935-4314 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name JaneiceBailey Sherrian Browne-Auguiste Ebonie Reddick Bonita Anderson Salina Jordan NA NA Gloria Tillman Sharon Pulliam Linda Cummings Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ UFT Member/ UFT Member/ Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Jodi-Ann Peck Robyn Bauman SassetteChristian Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Working collaboratively with parents, staff and the community, all students will be nurtured to become independent life-long learners equipped with critical thinking skills and real world knowledge. Students will be engaged in activities that foster self-esteem and purpose as well as rigorous instruction in order to achieve academic excellence to develop the whole child.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. We service students beginning in Pre-Kindergarten where the focus is to develop the social and emotional growth of students while providing experiences that address the whole child socially and cognitively. The curricula for all grades revolve around ELA, Mathematics, Social Studies and Science. We implement common core aligned curricula from Engage New York: Core Knowledge (Pre-k – 2 nd ) and Expeditionary Learning (3 rd - 5 th ) for English Language Arts and Common Core Inc. (Pre-k – 5 th ) a mathematics program which is supplemented by Envisions. Students in kindergarten through fifth grade are taught in 60 or 90-minute blocks of time through the workshop model approach. The Children are Reason Enough Team (CARE) collaborates with classroom teachers to support student needs outside of the academic areas. We are served by a full time guidance counselor and other support staff to ensure that the needs of the whole child are addressed and met. We are a community committed to supporting children through the learning process by scaffolding and differentiating instruction. Our staff members have been engaged in professional development centered on the Danielson Framework for Effective Teaching and the Common Core Learning Standards. Teachers are currently working to engage students in learning through linking questioning and discussion techniques and assessment criteria into their daily instructional practices while utilizing differentiation, small group and explicit instruction. Additionally, we continue to utilize the aforementioned practices to engage our students in writing across content areas as our instructional focus to deepen students’ thinking to build prior knowledge and extend their writing and broaden their capacity to learn. We approach every aspect of teaching and learning through teamwork, as we believe that together we will achieve the extraordinary. We are a staff that is highly committed to our school and we work hard to provide a varied and challenging curriculum. Technology is an integral part of educating our students. All classrooms have computers with internet access and smartboards. The library media center services scheduled classes and provides periods of open access for individuals and small groups. Our library is fully equipped with computers and printers. Students have multiple opportunities to use technology to support their learning. Further, students have the opportunity to build and create models to support their learning across curricula within our shop class. Public School 93 is a culturally diverse community of students and teachers. We show further distinction by offering programs that support and enrich the academic, cultural and social development of our diverse student body by partnering with the following organizations: Learning through an Expanded Arts Program (LEAP), the Brooklyn Botanical Gardens, New York University’s Tutoring Program, Noel Pointer Violin Program, Music and the Brain, Brooklyn Youth Chorus and Ballet Tech. Additionally, our students participate in a monthly oral presentation to reflect our character education theme for the month. Students have been engaged in The Adelaide Sanford’s Oratory Contest for the past 12 years. We were fortunate to receive a grant from Disney Musicals in Schools. Thus far we have produced Aristocats Kids, Jungle Book, Aladdin and most recently Cinderella. This afforded students the opportunity to be engaged with the performing arts to help foster effective communication skills, promote collegiality amongst students and encourage tolerance for experiences much different than their own. We continue our partnership with Noel Pointer wherein violin instruction is provided for students in grades 3-5. We have a long standing relationship with Restoration Plaza wherein they assist us with costumes, lighting and choreography. Through Restoration our students participate in an after school African dance program with final performances in the community and at BAM. Through our partnership with Brooklyn Chorus, our students have performed during our yearly Disney production and participate in our Grade 5 Moving On ceremony. Ballet Tech continues to offer our students individualized lessons at their studio. We continue our healthy choice initiative via Cookshop whereby proper food and nutrition is the focus. CookShop classroom uses hands-on exploration, cooking and physical activities to foster children’s enjoyment and consumption of healthy food and their appreciation for good nutrition and living an active lifestyle. With respect to families, the goal is the same and they are engaged in making healthy choices. We are in full implementation of Cookshop for 0  students and parents of kindergarten through 5 th grade. Additionally, in order to support our physical fitness program, we have added New York Junior Tennis and Learning Program. We were excited to receive the opportunity for our students to be involved in STEM through LEAP. Students learned how to identify a target audience, create a budget for product development, set a price point for their product or service and develop a marketing plan—all geared towards instilling the entrepreneurial spirit in students. They also had the opportunity to present their inventions to a wide forum among their peers. Further, teachers collaborate in grade-level teams to make the adjustments to the curricula and ensure alignment with the NYC Scope and Sequence. We continue our work on refining academic tasks to consistently provide appropriate scaffolds for all students to gain access to the CCLS. Depth of Knowledge (DOK) is utilized to engage students in deeper questioning and discussion techniques that will promote higher order thinking skills. Moreover, we are working towards ensuring that our students are aware of the assessment criteria, are able to self-assess and be engaged in robust conversations about their tasks. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The results of the 2017-2018 New York State ELA reflects 23.3% of students have met promotional criteria. This continues to be a work in progress to shift classroom libraries and instructional program to reflect 60% informational text and 40% fiction. Likewise, our students were significantly engaged in the writing process throughout the year to complete four writing assignments that ask them to read and analyze informational texts and write opinions and arguments. As a result of our students intense engagement with writing coupled with our increase results of promotional criteria, students will continue to be engaged in four writing assignments. With respect to mathematics, 19.8% of students have met promotional criteria. We will continue to engage our students in more problem solving tasks reflecting real-world that will be tracked via exemplars. Students in grades kindergarten through 5 th will continue to complete four common core aligned math exemplars that ask them to problem solve and make real world connections. Regarding our special populations: SWD, ENL and lowest thirds the same adjustment to classroom instruction is provided to meet students at their respective performance level. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The areas of most progress includes: Supportive Environment & Collaborative Teachers. Key areas of focus are: Strong Family-Community Ties and Rigorous Instruction and Collaborative Teachers. With respect to strong family community ties, we network with the local community to support our families. Such network includes NYPD Mentoring program, Brooklyn Youth Chorus, Noel Pointer and Community Day to share resources within the community. Additionally, our monthly school events and regular assemblies have been essential to building our community ties. Our teachers are engaged with regular differentiated professional development to support rigorous instruction both internally and externally. Our school schedule is designed to foster collaborative teaming wherein teachers have at least three (3) common preps per week and are encouraged to engage in low inference observations. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 13K093 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 277 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 35 35 16 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 16 16 7 5 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 97.0% % Attendance Rate 95.3% % Reduced Lunch 11.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 1.1% 7.6% 1.1% % Black or African American % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0.92 0% 5% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 26.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 89% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 8 8 16 85.5% 2.5% 18.8% 66.4% 23.5% 1.4% 2 0% 7 22.3% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The trend analysis will reflect 2015-2016, 2016-2017 and 2017-2018. After conducting a three year trend analysis of student performance data, it is determined that student performance in ELA decreased by 4.3% from 2016-2018 and in Mathematics, by 6.5% during the same time period. The above data reflects students meeting and exceeding proficiency in English Language Arts and Mathematics as measured by grades 3-5 on the New York State assessments. The strength of the school-data cited from Quality Review ● Establish a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students and families, and provide supports to achieve those expectations. At this juncture, after reflecting on teacher practice, we have formulated and currently utilizing five (5) instructional best practices. Such practices include: Small group instruction, differentiated instruction, teacher feedback aligned to a rubric with student reflection use of DOK levels 3 & 4 question stems. The strength of the school-data cited from School Quality Snapshot  Based on the 2016-29017 School Quality Snapshot, 92% of the participants responded positively to questions about collaborative teachers compared to the city of 87%. In addition, 89% of the participants responded positively to questions about the school's supportive environment in comparison to the city of 83%.  The needs of the school-data cited from Quality Review & Self-Reflection ● Develop teacher pedagogy from a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best that is informed by the instructional shifts and Danielson Framework for Teaching, aligned to the curricula, engaging, and meets the needs of all learners so that all students produce meaningful work products. After consistent review of student work, we sought the need to update the student reflection sheet to ensure they explain what they will do differently. The needs of the school-data cited from School Quality Snapshot 3  As per the 2016-2017 School Quality Snapshot, in the area of rigorous instruction, the school averaged 77%, falling below the district and city averages of 84% and 83% respectively. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of students in grades K through 5th will complete four writing assignments that ask them to read and analyze informational texts and write opinions & arguments in response resulting in a 50% decrease in Levels 1 and 2 on the NYS ELA exam. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Conduct two study groups: Designing Coherent Instruction & Data Driven Instruction. Lead teachers Utilize the Wilson Program to assist with decoding and build fluency to attack complex text. Gr. Pre-K -5, students with disabilities & ENL October 2018-June 2019 Administrators & Grade Leaders Utilize Fundations to build phonemic awareness and provide entry points to decoding. Utilize myOn to further access and address more informational text to build real world knowledge and provide entry points for students. Strategies include chunking with sentences, explicit instruction, use of graphic organizers so that focus can be targeteted, close reading, use of visual support to address language/vocabulary development Engage students to use RACE strategy on all writing assignments Assist with data specificity to strengthen assessments along with synthesis and analysis of data to determine next steps. All teachers As a result of Tuesday’s parent engagement activities, parents are provided ongoing resources to assist their child and promote further understanding of rigorous instruction. All parents All stakeholders are engaged by administrators to work collaboratively through SLT, PA, teacher and CARE/SIT Teams. Parents, students, teachers, guidance counselor, social worker, psychologist, paraprofessionals Administrators All teachers Administrators October 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 5  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Workshops conducted by parent coordinator and teachers on a monthly basis. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Adjustments will be made to the prep schedule to facilitate the teacher development & evaluation coach's schedule. The allocated Monday professional development time will be utilized to address the specified needs. If needed, teachers will be engaged in additional professional development session on Tuesdays. Our daily schedule accommodates teacher & CARE Team meetings. SLT and PA meet on a monthly basis. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 15, 2019 student writing assignments will be analyzed to indicate progress toward meeting this goal. 50% of our level 1 students will have moved to level 2 as measured by our mid-year benchmark assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) End of unit writing tasks from the respective curricula Core Knowledge & Expeditionary Learning, Periodic Assessment. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The strength of the school-data cited from Quality Review & School Quality Snapshot ● Principal utilizes newsletters, memorandums and feedback from informal and formal observations to continually communicate high expectations to students, staff, and families. ● School leaders provide in-house professional development to elevate instructional practices school-wide and staff is provided with opportunities to attend off-site professional learning sessions. Staff is also encouraged to turnkey and or provide professional development to support best practices. ● School leaders participate in team meetings and frequent classroom visits in order to ascertain the impact of professional learning opportunities on student work and teachers’ pedagogical practices providing additional supports when necessary. The needs of the school ● Continue working with teachers to ensure that curricula is engaging and demanding in all subject areas allowing all learners access to work based on rigorous standards. ● Teaching strategies inconsistently provide multiple entry points into curricula leading to uneven engagement Use of ongoing checks for understanding in order for adjustments in curricula and instruction to be made based on gathered data analysis.  Continue working with teachers to ensure instructional practices are intellectually challenging, differentiated and meet the needs of all learners.  Promote coherent assessment structures and practices to demonstrate students have achieved the intended outcome through the use of common assessment criteria. School Quality Snapshot 2016-2017 School Quality Guide 2016-2017   Data Sources    Quality Review 2016-2017   PPO Visits 2017-2018 & present School Quality Snapshot 2015-2016 7  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will engage in professional development activities designed to provide continued support in 1a, 1e, 3c and 3d (curriculum, pedagogy and assessment) as measured through teacher observations under Advance, with a student impact of 50% decrease of levels 1 & 2 on the NYS ELA & Math Exams. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Provide professional development to teachers with emphasis on curriculum, pedagogy and assessment utilizing "Understanding by Design", "Driven by Data" "PBL", All teachers September 2018-June 2019 Teachers/Administrators/BFSC Staff - classroom inter-visitations and use of mentors, - documentation of teacher-administrative conferences - walkthroughs and classroom observations inform PD direction Provide professional development to teachers to support their individual needs utilizing "Making Thinking Visible", teacher leaders to model best practices, Provide professional development to teachers to support special education and ELL strategies utilizing "The One-Stop Guide to Implementing RTI", grade level/vertical alignment team meetings, data analysis used to monitor the academic progress of specified sub group All teachers September 2018-June 2019 Teachers/Administrators/BFSC Staff All teachers September 2018-June 2019 Teachers/Administrators/BFSC Staff As a result of Tuesday's parent engagement activities, parents are provided ongoing resources and strategies to assist their child Parents, SWD & ENL All stakeholders are engaged by administrators to work collaboratively through SLT, PA, teacher and CARE/SIT Teams. - closely monitor & implement SIT action plan Parents, students, teachers, guidance counselor, social worker, psychologist, paraprofessionals Teachers Administrators September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 9  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly workshops conducted by parent coordinator and teachers. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will also utilize vertical and horizontal teacher teams to assist with sharing important findings to support growth in the areas of curriculum, pedagogy and assessment. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● Review results of informal and formal observations to determine teacher growth. Regularly review assessment results. Mid-point benchmark February 15, 2019 expecting 50% of teacher moving toward desired target. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Danielson Rubric, MOTP Detail Report and MOTP Summary Report. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The strength of the school-data cited from Quality Review ● All teachers are engaged in inquiry work. ● Grade teams meet weekly to discuss coherence regarding curricula, data and assessments. ● School leaders participate in the school’s inquiry work in order to determine how well teachers are using assessments to make modifications to lesson planning and their instructional practices. ● School leaders, through class visits and observations monitor instruction to see the alignment of team meeting discussions and classroom instruction. The needs of the school ● 75% of teachers need to regularly quantify data to support the students under study and reflect on teacher practice to guide planning for rigorous instruction ● Professional development in Advance, data analysis and assessments  Promote coherent assessment structures and practices to demonstrate students have achieved the intended outcome through the use of common assessment criteria. Data Sources School Quality Guide 2016-2017   Quality Review 2016-2017   PPO Visits 2017-2018 & Present  Advance as related to 1a & 3d School Quality Snapshot 2015-2016 Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 1  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers in grades Pre-K through 5th will implement systems and structures to reflect monitoring and revising curricula and instructional practices in response to student learning needs as measured by classroom observations resulting in a 5% increase in teacher effectiveness in component 3d. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Provide professional development to assist teachers with the ability to articulate with specificity the data of students under study utilizing "Driven by Data," and "Explicit Instruction." All teachers ENL, SWD September 2018-June 2019 Teachers/Administrators/BFSC Provide professional development in Advance & inquiry study to improve teacher practice with respect to creating systems and structures to monitor and revise curricula to support student growth - data is analyzed and used as a basis for determining teachers' professional development needs -Walkthroughs and classroom observation inform PD direction Teacher request for differentiated instruction to support specific needs. As a result of Tuesday’s parent engagement activities, parents are provided ongoing information and resources to assist their child to improve student performance. All stakeholders are engaged by administrators to work collaboratively through SLT, PA, teacher and CARE/SIT Teams All Teachers, ENL, SW September 2018-June 2019 Administrators Teachers Administrators September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 All Parents Parents, students, SWD, ENL, teachers, guidance counselor, social worker, psychologist, paraprofessionals 3  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly workshops conducted by parent coordinator and teachers. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will utilize the BFSC staff to provide additional professional development to support pedagogical growth as it reflects their needs with respect to Advance. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. February 15, 2019 administrators will analyze observation data to determine an overall increase of 10% teacher effectiveness in component 3c & 3d. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Danielson Rubric Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The strength of the school-data cited from Quality Review ● Utilization of questions from Webb’s DOK levels 3 & 4 ● School leaders provide feedback on pedagogical practices through the use of frequent classroom observations. ● Professional development has been provided in order to improve the use of questioning. ● School leaders follow up on previous feedback in future class visits including a review of student work samples thus ensuring teachers are reflective and growing more effective in their practice. ● The principal arranges the school’s resources in order to support its core values and instructional focus on increasing student proficiency in English language arts and mathematics. The needs of the school ● 25% of teachers require professional development to align tasks to learning outcomes.  Engaging students in conversations about their tasks  Provide regular use of Exemplars Data Source  Quality Review 2016-2017  PPO Visits 2017-2018 & Present  Advance as related to 1a, 3c & 3d Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 5  1. By June 2019, 100% of students in grades K through 5th will engage in four real world mathematical writing tasks resulting in a 50% decrease in Levels 1 and 2 on the NYS Math exam. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Provide professional development to align tasks to learning outcomes. All Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Teacher Development Coach/Administrators/Teachers - PD entitled "Increasing Rigor Throughout the Lesson (Data-Driven Classroom Best Practices) - Provide professional development to support teachers to facilitate the engagement of students’ conversations. All teachers, students, SWD, ENL September 2018-June 2019 Teacher Development Coach/Administrators/Teachers Utilize accountability talk question stems, DOK question stems to generate conversation amongst students. Utilize word problem strategies (i.e. underline math vocabulary, circle or box key information to support mathematical operation & highlight question being asked, utilize word problem plan sheet) - PD entitled "Activities & Assignments" - The DOs & Don't of Student Grouping -Utilizing DOK Levels 3 & 4 to facilitate accountable talk -Use of Math Prodigy As a result of Tuesday’s parent engagement activities, parents are provided ongoing information and resources to assist their child to improve student performance. Such resource parents, students, SWD, STH & ENL September 2018-June 2019 All Teachers 7 include Math Prodigy, Brain Pop to be utilized at home. AIS to support targeted groups All stakeholders are engaged by administrators to work collaboratively through SLT, PA, teacher and CARE/SIT Teams Administrators September 2018-June 2019 Parents, students, teachers, guidance counselor, social worker, psychologist, paraprofessionals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly workshops conducted by parent coordinator and teachers Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Adjustment to the prep schedule to accommodate the teacher development coach. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. February 15, 2019 students will complete 2 real world mathematical writing tasks to determine an overall decrease of levels 1 & 2 towards our 50% goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. End of Unit Assessment as per Common Core Inc. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The strength of the school-data cited from Quality Review ● School utilizes newsletters and monthly calendars to keep parents informed regarding the academic program ● Parents are afforded weekly sessions (workshops/face-to-face meetings) ● Parents as Learning Partners-Monthly ● Cookshop for families ● Monthly PA meetings  Monthly workshops   2 Events per month to engage parents, students and staff LEAP Worshops The needs of the school ● Increase parent involvement by 10% measured by sign-in sheets due to lack of parental involvement.  Establish new partnerships with local business to support family activities.  Local merchants help to support our monthly workshops (gift cards, refreshments, etc.)  Data Source PPO 2017-2018 & Present Quality Review 2016-2017 School Quality Guide 2016-2017 School Quality Snapshot 2016-2017 Attendance sheets 0  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will strive to increase parental involvement by 10% to strengthen families as measured by an analysis of sign-in/attendance sheets. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Provide assemblies/programs that highlight student academic & social achievement. Parents, students (SWD, ENL & STH) November 2018-June 2019 Teachers/Administrators Utilize monthly calendar and flyers to inform parents of events Events are available and posted in different languages to support ENL families Regularly update school's marquee Engage PA to provide information Engage Parent Coordinator to attend to the needs of parents as needed As a result of Tuesday’s parent engagement activities, parents are provided ongoing information and resources to assist their child to improve student performance All Parents, students (SWD, ENL & STH) September 2018-June 2019 • Provide parent and child game night. • Conduct health and wellness workshops with the goal of increasing student and family attention to nutrition and exercise. • Utilize parent coordinator & community associate to solicit merchants to partner with school. Families of the student population September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Family Workers, Administrators, Guidance Counselor, SIT/CARE Team Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Family Workers, Administrators, Guidance Counselor, SIT/CARE Team, Nurse, School Aides, Paraprofessionals, SLT 2 • Encourage local businesses /partnerships to participate in workshops. • Utilize & post reminder flyers to support increased attendance. All stakeholders are engaged by administrators to work collaboratively through SLT, PA, teacher and CARE/SIT Teams. Parents, students, teachers, guidance counselor, social worker, psychologist, paraprofessionals September 2018-June 23019 Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Family Workers, Administrators, Guidance Counselor, SIT/CARE Team, Nurse, School Aides, Paraprofessionals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will utilize our parent coordinator, guidance counselor, family worker, school aides and social worker to engage families with respect to advertisement during school-wide events. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. February 2019 administrators will analyze student register, parent attendance sheets, to determine the effects of new partnerships as it pertains to parent involvement. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance sheets for Assemblies and PTCs Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Proficiency Ratings that did not meet state standards passing. Performance score on MOSL that failed to meet benchmarks. Poor academic performance and recommendations of teachers based on observed behaviors Proficiency Ratings that did not meet state standards for passing Mathematics poor academic performance and recommendations of teachers based on observed behaviors Proficiency Ratings that did not meet state standards for passing ELA and Mathematics poor academic performance and recommendations of teachers based on observed behaviors Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Differentiated Instruction. Guided reading, small group and conferences. Differentiated Instruction. Guided math group, small group and conferences. Differentiated Instruction. Guided reading, small group and conferences. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day and supplemental after school sessions. During the school day and supplemental after school sessions. During the school day and supplemental after school sessions. Small group instruction utilizing high interest materials which parallel the regular academic instructional program. Small group instruction utilizing high interest materials which parallel the regular academic instructional program. Small group instruction utilizing high interest materials which parallel the regular academic instructional program. 4  Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Proficiency Ratings that did not meet state standards for passing in ELA. poor academic performance and recommendations of teachers based on observed behaviors Students with excessive absences, difficulty conforming to group norms, poor academic performance and recommendations of teachers based on patterns of observed behaviors Differentiated Instruction. Guided reading, small group and conferences. Small group instruction utilizing high interest materials which parallel the regular academic instructional program. During the school day and supplemental after school sessions. Individualized counseling and group counseling as is needed During the school day Guidance Counselor – ERRSA program is an eight week duration for 30 minutes in a group or instructional setting sessions. It is used to address students social/emotional needs. The services are peer mediation School Psychologist – At risk counseling with students before recommendation and referral involving observations of students who will possibly need at risk counseling. Update testing to see if student’s academics have improved Social worker – Child signs a contract with the changes he/she wants to make, and social worker follows up with the teacher and child once a week. Institute a monitored conduct sheet for teacher to sign. 5  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 23 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. uniforms, books, book bags and at risk guidance services Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 6  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 7  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Retention and Support In our efforts to retain highly qualified teachers and ensure they have the support and strategies to grow professionally, we are highly invested in professional development. We offer professional development to teachers on current topics provided by other teachers, administrators, as well as support staff from our BFSC. Mentoring is implemented as per teacher requirements. We believe in an individual professional development plan specifically designed to focus on each teacher’s needs. Teachers are active participants in the process and collaborate with administrators to review their goals and monitor progress and development. Each teacher will develop annual goals in accordance with their continual self-assessment. The Danielson’s Framework for Teacher Effectiveness (2007) will be used as a professional course of study. All professional development is researched and evidence based. Research based strategies are emphasized throughout our trainings. Inter/intra-visitations are encouraged for all teachers as well as self-selected participation in external professional development opportunities. An interview process is conducted by a committee to interview perspective candidates. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). • A school professional learning plan for existing teachers to improve practice based on the NYC Chancellor’s Professional learning Handbook. 8  • Continually train and support in the Danielson Framework with teachers to familiarize them with criteria for exemplary teaching components • Utilize an effective teacher model rubric (Danielson Framework) to provide feedback to teachers. • Utilize professional development suggestions by PD committee • Provide feedback to teachers in short and frequent cycles for continuous improvement. • Support new teachers in tenure process. • Utilize the BFSC for PD sessions. - Utilize Teacher Development Coach - Provide opportunities for teachers to be engaged with inter/intra-visitation Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). • Parent and child orientations. • 2 hour sessions in small groups for the first week of school. • Parent & child in classroom for the first month of school. • Parents assist child with breakfast 9  • Welcoming environment to support academic and social development • Pre-K social worker & family assistant available to parents and conduct workshops - Parents as Learning Partners -Monthly - Tuesdays- Parent Engagement workshops & one-to-one sessions - Monthly parent workshops 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. A committee consisting of teacher leaders representing each grade has been established to assist with assessment selection and use. Professional development is conducted accordingly to support the use of assessment results and strategic planning. This committee works in conjunction with the cabinet. A school-wide meeting is held with all constituents for consensus. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E55555555 Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 1Explanation/Background: 218,116 116,799 0 0 1,615,274 x x x x x 0  Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities 1  funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 13K093, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. William H. Prescott will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 3  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 4  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) 5  13K093, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are 6  available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents 7  Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; 8  ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 9  0  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 13 School Name William H. Prescott Borough Brooklyn School Number 093 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Janeice Bailey Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Gayle Liddell Teacher/Subject Area Tanisha Dorvil/Grade 2 Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider Cheena Mitchell -Speech Superintendent Barbara Freeman Assistant Principal N/A Coach type here School Counselor E. Eze-Umebuani Parent Linda Cummings Parent Coordinator Rhonda Dash Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 1  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 276 Total number of ELLs 30 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 10.87% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K N/A N/A NA NA NA NA 1 NA NA NA NA NA NA 0 n/a NA NA NA NA NA 0 Lang. N/A N/A NA NA NA NA Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 2 NA NA NA NA NA NA 0 4 NA NA NA NA NA NA 0 3 NA NA NA NA NA NA 0 5 NA NA NA NA NA NA 0 6 na NA NA NA NA NA 0 7 na NA NA NA NA NA 0 8 na NA NA NA NA NA 0 9 na NA NA NA NA NA 0 10 NA NA NA NA NA NA 0 11 NA NA NA NA NA NA 0 12 NA NA NA NA NA NA 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school utilizes DRA to assess the literacy skills and to determine the current levels at which the ELL's are functioning. Teachers also create their own assessments to measure student knowledge and learning before, during, and after engagement in a unit topic. These assessments provide instructors with information regarding the level of capability of each student assessed. Teachers have three (3) common preparation periods per week. One of these is used to review and analyze data that has been gathered. The results of the data analysis provides the teachers with solid evidence regarding the the performance level of the ELL's and helps them to plan instruction and intervention accordingly. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2  The data obtained from the assessments is analyzed to determine the areas of strength and weakness of each student. It also provides information about their reading level, fluency, and any patterns that they may exhibit. This information is then used to design lessons, tasks, and activities that will directly address the particular needs of individual students. Once the summative data has been gathered, it is utilized to provide academic intervention services within the classroom. Small group instruction is used to target the specific needs of the students and are supported by specific action plans to address their deficiits. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The ultimate goal is to meet AYP for the ELL students. However, if this is not achieved, we utilize the breakdown for each student's NYSESLAT results from the RLAT. This report allows us to determine how students performed on the latest exam and to compare results to previous years. If scores for individual test components rise and/or students move up to a higher designation (as compared to the previous year), then we can note that progress has been made. If students are stagnant or regress, then we have to examine those situations more closely and devise a plan to stimulate academic growth. We also administer the ELL Periodic Assessment and use the results to determine student needs and target instruction to help them meet those needs. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The summative data is shared and discussed during Data Inquiry meetings. Using the data, students are selected for small group interventions that take place over a period of time. Assessments are given at the end of a selected time frame to determine if additional scaffolds/strategies are needed in that area. If progress is evident, a different area of need becomes the new focus and the process is repeated. Student work is available at each session and used as the topic for discussion. After analyzing the work the team decides on strategies/activities that may be utilized to bring about desired results. the Data Inquiry teams meet weekly and set goals for the students that have a specific target date. If the results of the target assessments are satisfactory, a new short-term goal is established. Should the goal not be met by the target date, additional time for that focus area will be given and another assessment will be administered. The Data Inquiry teams are in place for the entire school year. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Data is used to assist with identifying ELL's who are struggling with content area material while they are developing English language skills. Intervention and action plans are developed based on the data. These are then implemented to meet the needs of the students who have been identified as at-risk. If improvement at a designated tier level is not noted, the ELL student will be moved into a different tier to meet their needs more fully. Movement into the higher tiers means that the student will receive more academic support, either in the classroom or other settings. Implementing RTI means the instruction is tailored to meet the needs of the student as a means to have that individual achieve academic success. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Entering or beginning students who have not received any schooling in this country and who are tested with NYSITELL generally do not pass this exam and become eligible for services. However, it has been noted that many of the ELL's who participate in a Pre-K program demonstrate success when they are given the NYSITELL. These students may pass the NYSITELL or score at the expanding or transitional levels. Those who do not pass the NYSITELL usually score in the entering and emerging range. Generally, most students across grades K-5 show growth in language development on the NYSESLAT if they have been in regular attendance during the school year. Scores for listening and speaking are most often higher than those for reading and writing. The ELL Data Analysis Tool will be used to provide information about the progress of ELL's as they work towards achieving commanding status on the NYSESLAT. In addition, the information provided will help the school to plan and design programs specifically targeted to meet the needs of the ELL's in both ELA and content area subjects. NYSESLAT results and exam scores for both the New York State ELA and Mathematics exams are used to inform the direction of the ELL program. 3  7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Information about individual ELL designations is shared and discussed with their classroom instructors. Both the ENL and the classroom teacher have conversations throughout the school year about student progress and discuss strategies, methodologies and resources that can be implemented to foster improvement and progress. Samples of student work are analyzed and discussed at both common preparation periods and inquiry team meetings. The ENL provider is readily available to assist classroom teacher regarding their ELL students. Classroom teachers in testing grades also use the latest state exams results to help them address areas tha need to be targeted for their ELL students to promote greater achievement on the current yearly exams. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. ELL's in our Freestanding ENL Program Students receive pull-out services. Students are grouped across two contiguous grades with mixed proficiency levels within each group. Entering and emerging students are programmed for the required 360 minutes of instruction per week. Transitioning and expanding students receive the mandated 180 minutes of instruction per week. Any student who scored at the commanding level of the NYSESLAT continues to receive services (90 minutes weekly) from the ENL provider for two years following that designation. They are also entitled to all testing accommodations within that two year period. Groups travel to the ENL room accompanied by the instructor. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Once the RLAT is made available at the beginning of the school year, the ENL provider uses the information to schedule each continuing student according to their mandated minutes. Results are also gathered from new and entering students who have been deemed eligible to be tested with NYSITELL. All who do not pass this exam are also put into the ENL program with the appropriate minutes for their designations. This information is then entered into STARS. The ENL instructor provides services for double periods (90 minutes) or single periods (45 minutes) according to the mandated minutes that each ELL must receive on a weekly basis. This process continues throughout the year as new entitled students enroll. Instructional minutes for HLA are not applicable to our program. All instruction for all of the content areas is delivered in English. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All instruction is in English. Topics are aligned with the mainstream classroom teachers and best practices are shared at staff conferences and grade meetings. Each lesson prepared and delivered by the ENL instructor contains the four components of speaking, listening, reading, and writing. Many of the activities included in the lessons mirror elements contained on the NYSESLAT exam which is administered to all students in grades K-5. Core content is delivered using ENL strategies and 4  methodologies with alignment to the Common Core Learning Standards. Lessons also contain a language focus to address specific areas such as grammar and mechanics. Students are provided with and encouraged to use strategies to help them achieve success in learning the target language. Students are grouped into tiers and their tasks and activities reflect the needs and abilities of their specific groups. Multiple entry points for access are made available to meet the needs of the various student levels. Also, students are provided with resources and manipulatives to assist with their learning. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? All instruction is conducted in English. Our school does not assess students in their home languages. If a student on a testing grade is eligible to be tested on a state content area exam, then that test is ordered and administered during the testing window. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Students who are SIFE and Newcomers receive instruction that is geared towards helping these groups develop languge skills that will help them fill in the gaps as they learn. A separate block of time is scheduled to address the specific needs of these two groups. Technological programs with visuals and word/sound connections helps to provide them with beginning language skills. Developing students are infused with a wealth of visuals and they have access to technology that helps them gain a fuller understanding at their current level of language development. Participation in class discussions and debates are encouraged to promote confidence in oral fluency. Partnering and group work is also used as an effective strategy for both newcomers and develping students. Long Term ELL's are provided with more rigorous tasks and projects that enables them to dig deeper into a given topic/ assignments aligned to their ability. Commanding ELL's receive mandated services (90 minutes per week) in a content area that has been identified as an area they need assistance with. Those in this group usually work independently to complete rigorous tasks/projects on topics related to their mainstream classroom assignments,. The ENL instructor provides the commanding students with materials and resources they need to complete their tasks. In addition, this group is often called upon to lead class discussions and to facilitate group activities for advanced students. Commanding ELL's receive their weekly mandated minutes (90), and testing accommodations for two years after they attained this designation on the NYSESLAT. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELL's with disabilities use a variety of grade-level materials as extra resources to assist with instruction of this population. Manipulatives, visuals, and other hands-on-materials are incorporated into lessons.Technology programs are also utilized to foster independent learning and allow students to work and progress at their own level and pace. Strategies and methodologies that are geared toward the special education population are implemented to help them meet the demands of common core. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Teachers of ELL's with SWD's plan for instruction that is aligned to goals on the IEP and the present performance level of the student. Additional resources, such as manipulatives and visual aids are provided to support these students as they strive towards grade-level performance. The ENL Provider provides push-in services for ELL's with SWD's. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All ELL's in testing grades (3-5) receive small-group instruction with their classroom teacher as an intervention service based on data from assessments and exam results. This same group receives additional after-school assistance through the Title 3 5  Program and all mainstream after-school and intervention programs. Small group work and after-school program instruction encompasses all content areas. Instruction is delivered in English only. Native language assistance is available through use of the native language library that has a variety of informational texts. Struggling ELL's are selected for focus on the inquiry teams where their specific areas of need are targeted. In addition, the ELL students receive academic intervention during the school day during the two periods per week that are set aside for this . These intervention sessions focus on both ELA and Math. All intervention is provided in the target language of English. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? This school year there are two Academic Intervention periods per week for the entire school. Students who are not in need receive enrichment during those periods. As the ENL instructor, I will continue to focus on developing vocabulary (communicative and academic) and provide students with varied opportunites to practice what they have learned. Class discussions provide a good forum for all students to participate and allows me to observe their interactions/progress within their groups. This year students will continue to build on developing their discussion skills and then transfer information from these oral sessions to their writing tasks. Hopefully, this wil contribute to an improvement in both areas. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Currently our school has no plans to discontinue any programs or services for ELL's. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELL's enrolled in our school are afforded an equal opportunity to attend or engage in any program offered by the school. Currently, ELL's in testing grades (3-5) actively participate in the Title 3 after-school program which is held on Mondays through Thursday. The materials used for this program are different from those used for instruction during the school day. Participation in the program is obtained from the parents using translated letters. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Students have access to laptops to support their technological needs and provides them with additional resources. Materials by Coach are used to support students in both ELA and Math. CAVS is utilized for science instruction. Reading A-Z and Brainpop have proved beneficial to ELL's as technological programs purchased by the school and available for students to utilize at home. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The classroom of the ENL provider has a native language library that supports the home languages of the students. Brainpop, for which the school has a license, also offers a component for speakers of Spanish. Technological programs in the home language are used when available and necessary (predominantly for entering and emerging students). 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Resource materials that are purchased and utilized are grade-level appropriate. Recent purchases are aligned to the common core curriculum. Hands-on materials are provided for all grade levels in the area of mathematics amd science. NYSESLAT preparation materials from Attanasio & Associates are used throughout the year to prepare for that exam. Reading comprehension cards with corresponding questions are used to foster independent reading and responding. Appropriateness for grade level use is determined prior to purchase and use. Coach materials are used for both the New York State ELA and Math test preparation. Also, students are given the previous years state exams as added authentic practice. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). 6  At the beginning of the school year the Parent Coordinator conducts a workshop to welcome new parents and gives them an overview of what they can expect. The Guidance Counselor and the ENL instructor provide continuous outreach to parents of ELL's to keep them informed of school-wide programs and activities. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Currently, the only instructional language at our school is English. We do not offer any other languages for instruction at this time. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Our school does not have a dual language program at this time. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All teachers of ELL's are made aware of the professional development activities that are being offered year round. Flyers and information about upcoming professional development in this area are posted. Teachers who attend off-site professional development regarding ELL instruction turnkey the information to other staff members. In addition, all staff members receive ELL professional development presented by the ENL provider. Separate sessions are sometimes provided for topics for Pre-K through 2 and grades 3-5, since the latter group has testing concerns and issues. The ENL teacher and classroom teachers attend outside workshops that pertain to ELL instruction. The ELL provider is part of ongoing professional development hosted by the Brooklyn North Field Support team. They provide a variety of workshops related to ENL topics throughout the school year. The ENL provider shares this information with school staff members. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The ENL provider works closely with the Guidance Counselor during Middle School Articulation. They collaborate on at least two workshops covering this topic. The ENL provider personally assists the parents of ELL's with choosing a middle school and completing the application process. The ENL provider will deliver the mandated hours required by CR Part 154.2 of ELL Professional Development to staff members during staff conference Mondays. Non-pedagogic staff attend the sessions and receive the information as well. The topics include strategies for ELL's, ELL's and the Common Core, How Language Develops and Best Practices for ELL Success. Agendas and resources are distributed at these sessions and attendance records are maintained by both administration and the ENL Provider. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? 7  Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents of ELL's are invited to meet with the ENL Provider for bi-monthly sessions that pertain to topics relevant to the population. There is a calendar for Parent Engagement Tuesdays that address topics geared towards parents of ELL's. Also, parents who have concerns are encouraged to set up appointments for individual sessions. If a translator is needed, outreach to the Translation &Interpretation Unit is made. On the other hand, if the ENL provider has concerns, she takes steps to set up a one-to-one conference with the parents in question. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. THe ELL parent involvement is fairly good at our school. There is usually a high turnout for workshops. ELL parents volunteer as Learning Partners and chaperone trips. A large number attend PTA meetings and other workshops and school-wide events. They encourage their children to try-out for and attend the annual Disney school-wide performance. This year we are planning to have five workshops that are geared to enhance literacy skills among parents of ELL's and foster multicultural awareness. These will be held in the mornings and will be scheduled on a monthly basis. At the beginning of the school year, the Parent Coordinator provides a special workshop for all parents new to the building. Important information about the school and their roles is discussed. Translated materials are also provided. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. There is no additional information at this time. 8 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Sandra Philip, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 9  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: William H. Prescott School DBN: 13K093 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Sandra Philip Title Principal Janeice Bailey Assistant Principal Rhonda Dash Parent Coordinator Gayle Liddell ENL/Bilingual Teacher Linda Cummings Parent Tanisha Dorvil/Grade 2 Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach E. Eze-Umebuani School Counselor Barbara Freeman Cheena Mitchell - Speech Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Related Service Provider Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 0  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 13K093 School Name: William H. Prescott Superintendent: Barbara Freeman The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Gayle Liddell ESL Teacher YES YES * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The language preferences selected by parents or guardians on the Home Language Identification Surveys and the Emergency Contact cards are utilized for parent communication. If in-house translation is not available in either written or oral form, outreach is made to the Translation and Interpretation Unit. An additional way to collect data would be to use the information from the blue cards regarding the preferred language of communication. A list would be compiled for each class and distributed to the respective classroom teachers. The teachers would utilize this information to help them determine which students need translated letters/notices for home. The report would be updated as new students enroll. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 1  Arabic Bengali French Fulani Haitian Creole English Pashto Spanish Sudanese Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 60 30 2 1 2 15.35 60 15.35 7.67 31 0.51 0.26 0.51 2 1 2 7.93 0.51 0.26 0.51 292 74.68 2.91 74.42 1 2 1 0.26 0.51 0.26 1 2 1 0.26 0.51 0.26 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Not Applicable Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2  Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families Parent-teacher conference notices are sent out in September & November 2018. Also, in March & May of 2019. The Title 3 after-school notices are sent out in either November or December of the school year. Notices for other events are sent out about 2 weeks prior to the scheduled event. translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. N/Notices for Parent-Teacher conferences will be translated using the pre-translated documents and templates that are available for use, Outside assistance will be sought regarding translation of parent notices for the Title 3 after-school program and other school events. Requests will be made at least two weeks before the translations will be distributed. Parent-teacher conference announcements are translated from the English version and distributed in a timely fashion prior to the events. In addition, the Title 3 after-school program information is issued in English and the language of preference (when indicated), prior to the start of the program. Also, notices about school events like Math & Sports night, Family Cook-off, and Read in your Pajamas are translated. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 3  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school Parent-Teacher conferences and Curriculum nights. plan to provide interpretation service(s)? If an interpretation is needed, school personnel will seek access to the over-the-phone-interpretation service that is available 24/7. September and November 0f 2018. March and May of 2019. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency, school personnel will use the information the parents/guardians provided on the blue emergency card. Parents/guardians who do not have a high proficiency in English, usually include a secondary or tertiary contact on the form who does have a high proficiency in English. Every effort will be made by school personnel to make the parent aware of any emergency regarding their child. If no one can be reached, the school will follow what is dictated on the blue emergency card. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Staff members are provided with a list of students in their classroom whom the parent has requested that communication be issued in a language other than English. The Parent Coordinator assists them with providing translated letters/notices that they issue. Also, teachers are provided with a list of services that the Language and Interpretation Unit provides. They are advised to seek translated documents in a timely manner so they can comply with the parent request. The Language Access Coordinator and the Parent Coordinator work with the staff on issues regarding translated documents. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage 4   Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Translated signage is available upon entering the main office. The Language Identification Guide is also available in the main office and at the Security Officer’s desk. Parent brochures and other translated materials provided by the DOE are visible upon entering the main office. Flyers for upcoming school events are posted and distributed at PTA meetings in the translated languages. The Parent Coordinator conducts a workshop for new parents at the beginning of the school year. She informs parents of the availability of language assistance and translation services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The Language Access Coordinator will work with the Parent Coordinator to conduct a parent survey in order to garner feedback on parent needs and wants. Steps will be taken to create a focus group of ELL parents who will provide direct feedback about their particular needs and concerns. Efforts will then we made to implement changes to address the issues they have identified. 5 
