 21K099 School Name: P.S. 099 ISAAC ASIMOV Principal: GREGORY PIRRAGLIA   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: PS 99 332100010099 PreK-8 1120 East 10 Street 718 338 9201 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 21K099 718 951 0418 Fax: Gregory Pirraglia gpirrag@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Gregory Pirraglia Susan Deasy Jennifer Impoco Gaetano Impoco ArianneElshawarby n/a n/a District Information Geographical District: 21 Isabel DiMola Superintendent: 1401 Emmons Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11235 Superintendent’s Office Address: IDiMola@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 648 0209 Phone Number: 718 648 2165 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Brooklyn South- D 21 MauriciereDegovia FSC: Executive Director: 415 89 Street, Brooklyn, NY 11209 Executive Director’s Office Address: MDegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917 445 7448 Phone Number: 718 240 3677 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Gregory Pirraglia Susan Deasy Jennifer Impoco ArianneElshawarby SantinaScarlino Julie Keller Patricia Arniotes *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ Teacher   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) MarielleAbramson Gaetano Impoco CandelariaTlatelpa Member/ Parent Member/ Parent/Chairperson Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Vision Section 4: CEP Overview We envision our school as a community of learners where all members, students, staff, and parents are actively engaged in the educational process and are ensuring equity and excellence for all students. Staff and parents at PS 99 are focused on empowering all students with the academic skills and rich civic and social experiences that will enable them to further their educational goals and become active, responsible contributing members of society. Students will develop important decision-making, critical thinking, technological skills and the ability to communicate effectively. All   members of our school community will share accountability for creating a positive and supportive educational environment, and for achieving successful student outcomes. Mission Statement We are a diverse, collaborative school community dedicated to achieving high standards of academic excellence for all of our students so that they will become critical thinkers, active problem solvers, inquisitive readers, effective workers, diligent researchers and technologically savvy. We will create a community of life-long learners through high-quality standards-driven instruction, a nurturing environment and the development of civic, social and technological skills. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS 99, a pre-kindergarten to eighth grade neighborhood school with a population of 855 students, is a central part of the community to many of the students and their families. The school building is a well-kept, old building where we recently celebrated the school’s 104th anniversary. P.S. 99's multicultural student population includes students who come from culturally and ethnically diverse backgrounds, and whose first language for many is not English. More than 25% (221 students) of our total student population is English Language Learners. The linguistic diversity of our families makes up over 27 languages. Our ELLs enter our school at all grade levels, with a range of proficiency in English, and varying degrees of literacy and academic competencies in their home or primary language. Our three + ENL teachers take these factors into consideration when planning and providing instruction that will afford the ELLs, who often trail their peers in grade level work, the opportunity to develop academic language and English proficiency in grade-level ELA and mathematics standards. PS 99 houses a gifted SIGMA program for exceptional students in grades K-5 with one homogeneous class on each grade. It is our goal to recognize and develop the diverse abilities and talents of each student and to provide an educational program and differentiated curriculum which will improve creativity and higher level thinking skills. Our goal is to enable each student to develop his abilities to the fullest. Technology is infused into literacy, science, social studies, math, and art. We have created building-wide wireless Internet access and have interactive Smart Boards in every instructional classroom in the building. We are proud to say that we have provided personal tablets/iPads to each student. This makes it possible for our students to have opportunities to learn from home with access to accounts online in literacy, math, science and social studies. Our goal is to go completely digital across all grades and content areas in terms of access and curriculum. Our Arts program, which we believe is important to the development and education of our students, is aligned with The NYC Blueprint for Teaching and Learning in the Arts. We have a full and part-time certified music teacher, and a full and part-time certified art teacher. In order to link the home/school communities and develop and maintain stronger family-community ties, the school leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Our school has been selected to participate in the School Mental Health Consultant Program, THRIVE NYC, to promote healthy social, emotional and behavioral development of students. 0  In addition, Ballet Tech, a non-profit organization promotes excellence in the art of dance for our 3 rd grade students. These partnerships encourage an increase of engagement between the school and the home. We participate with Brooklyn College and Touro College as part of a professional development continuum, whereby high school students who are student observers, and college students who are student teachers, are given the opportunity to work and learn in our school community. We are proud of our successes including the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide results, which indicates that 96% of parents feel there is a strong sense of community at PS 99 and 95% of students feel safe in our school. This data indicates that we are meeting the social, and emotional needs of our diverse student body. We have managed to improve school culture and create a supportive environment built on trust. This is evidenced by our annual celebrations which include the Science Fair, Talent Show, Family Movie Night and ongoing class assemblies and parent events. Our efforts to create a positive and rigorous learning environment have resulted in our identification as a School in Good Standing. Our latest Quality Review evaluation in March 2016 indicates that PS 99 is well developed in the areas of (2.2) assessing what students are learning, and (3.4) establishing a culture for learning. We are proficient in (1.1) ensuring engaging and rigorous curriculum, in (1.2) effective teaching, and in (4.2) engaging in structured professional collaborations. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. A significant challenge that PS 99 faces is our large immigrant and Special Education population. Over 25% of our student population is ELLs and over 20% are Students with Disabilities who have IEPs. This continues to be a concern as we strive to meet their needs. Another challenge is that each year PS 99 is faced with a large new middle school population. A large number of 6th graders are transferred to PS 99 from other schools. Many of these new students enter with a need for intense Academic and Social Intervention Services. Students have difficulty transitioning to middle school. P.S. 99's multicultural student population includes students who come from culturally and ethnically diverse backgrounds, and whose first language for many is not English. Our student body comes from homes in which more than 27 different languages are spoken. More than 25% (221 students) of our total student population is English language learners. Our three + ENL teachers provide instruction to these students who speak little or no English and therefore often trail their peers in grade level work. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. With respect to the Framework for Great Schools, we are proficient in (1.1) ensuring engaging and rigorous curriculum, in (1.2) effective teaching, and in (4.2) engaging in structured professional collaborations 1  Key areas of focus for the 2018-2019 school year  We will strive for academic excellence with a focus on the performance of all students in grades PreK- 8 (inclusive of the ELLs, Students with Disabilities, and those students performing at the lowest third) meeting the standards and making yearly progress in ELA and Math, in order to successfully close the achievement gap and ensure that every student is college and career ready.  Grade 7 will be targeted for college readiness through college-oriented activities (i.e., assemblies, college visits, etc.).  We will focus on Family and Community Engagement and parent involvement for all students Pre K-8 (including Students with Disabilities and ELLs). We will engage parents and family in every aspect of school life to support the social and emotional journey of each child both inside and outside the classroom, thereby improving student academic outcomes.. 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 21K099 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 876 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 26 26 38 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 35 35 33 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 74.0% % Attendance Rate 72.1% % Reduced Lunch 27.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.5% 17.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 31.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 15.99 0% 11% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 45.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 83% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO YES NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO YES NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A YES N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 80 78 91.2% 0.8% 12.9% 7.5% 42.2% 0.8% 0 7% 8.4 44.2% 30% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES NO N/A NO YES NO NO N/A NO YES N/A NO N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. To examine the strengths and weaknesses of our students, we analyzed our DOE reports, quantitative and qualitative data, and information on the Quality Review. An analysis of Grade 3-8 ELA assessment results over a two-year period from 2017 to 2018 indicates the following: ELA results for grade 3-8 All tested students indicates that the percent of proficient students increased 7.4% for 2017 and 2018. ELA results for Grade 5 All tested students indicates a 5% increase in the number of students performing at or above a Level 3. (From 35.6% to 40.2%) ELA results for Grade 7 All tested students indicates a minimal increase of .4% in the number of students performing at or above a Level 3. (From 29.3% to 29.7%) An analysis of Grade 3-8 Math assessments results over a two-year period from 2017-2018 indicates the following: Math results for grade 3-8 All tested students indicates a 5% increase in the number of students performing at or above a Level 3. (From 39.2% to 44.2%) Math results for Grade 5 All tested students indicates a 21% decrease in the number of students performing at or above a Level 3. (From 57% to 45%) Math results for Grade 7 All tested students indicates a 10% increase in the number of students performing at or above a Level 3. (From 26.4% to 36.4%) 4  The academic performance of general education students in grades 3-8 indicates a positive trend. However, when comparing the academic performance for Grade 5 and Grade 7 students to the performance of grades 3-8, it is of clear that significantly fewer grade 5 and grade 7 students performed at or above a Level 3 in both literacy and math. Priorities for 2018-2019  To make grades 5 and 7 our target groups for increasing progress in ELA and Math. There continues to be a need to close the gap in achievement for grades 5 and 7, when compared to the other general education students in the remaining grades.  To develop and refine teacher pedagogy so that instructional classroom practice addresses the strengths and needs of all students.  Deepen classroom practice to ensure engaging, rigorous instruction that promotes higher order thinking for all students.  To ensure that individual students and particular sub-groups make progress from year to year and close the achievement gap for all students including ELLs and special needs students.  Engage parents and family in every aspect of school life. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 75% of our target group of 5th and 7th-grade students will exhibit increased academic rigor in ELA and Math as measured by advancing one level on end-of-year ELA and Math assessments. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ELA instructional program aligned to the common core as follows: Imagine It along with Open Court for Grades PreK-6, Core Knowledge for grades pre K-2, Continental Language Arts and Grammar for grades 6-8, Expeditionary Learning and Imagine Learning for Grades 3- 8. Go Math instructional program and Imagine It Math ( an on line self-directed technology instruction that targets each student's unique needs) aligned to the common core. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students PreK-8 All students K-8 All teachers Sept.-June 55-90 min. daily Sept-June 55-90 min. daily All classroom teachers, funded reading teacher, AIS teachers, coaches, school leaders All staff, principal, assistant principals, coaches, instructional team All teachers Teachers Monday weekly PD Sept-June Social Studies lessons will be planned and implemented with a student focus, and provide multiple entry points for all students. Weekly PD School Leaders All teachers participate in weekly professional development on: UDL strategies, ELL strategies, DOK, trends analysis, use of protocols to look at student work, best practices, scaffolds and subject content, technology, in addition to Imagine Learning. Teachers’ programs have been arranged to facilitate planning and collaboration and to turn- key instructional strategies to vertical and horizontal teams. Collecting and analyzing data from summative and formative assessments will drive planning and instruction. Intervisitation opportunities for educators to share and replicate strong practices and learn from one another. Teachers of grade 6,7 Sept-Nov Dec-Feb Mar-June As needed 6  Teacher observations and frequent actionable feedback; cabinet meetings to reflect on teacher and student performance; observation reports using the Advance system. Teachers will analyze data from the Imagine Learning program to better individualize instruction and craft rigorous lessons based on need and skill mastery. This will enable teachers to push student thinking both for remediation and enrichment. 2. The instructional programs for students with disabilities, ELLs and other high-need students continue to be aligned with general education, using intervention supports and strategies such as ELL strategies, UDL, strategies, and/or differentiated intervention accommodations, to ensure all students have access to rigorous and engaging instruction. Response to intervention differentiated instruction for ELLs and students with disabilities. ELLs, SWDs, high- need students ELLs, Students with Disabilities 2 periods per day Sept.-June Principal, assistant teachers, parent coordinator Principal, assistant teachers, parent coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Throughout the school year, the principal schedules and oversees monthly workshops from September 2018 - June 2019, curriculum nights, family nights, middle and high school guidance and application process assistance, and parent-teacher conferences in September, November, March and May. At those times there are opportunities for parents and teachers to meet and to establish a rapport and clarify expectations. Attendance sheets show evidence of well-attended information sessions for families. The parent coordinator makes every effort to ensure that written and verbal communication is provided to parents in their native language to the best extent possible. The administration, teachers, and coaches provide information about and discuss: instructional shifts, goals and student progress, trends in student performance, and ways to support their child's progress. Handouts to parents review the instructional shifts in ELA and math and review recommendations for what parents can do at home to help support the shifts. 7  At least once per month, the principal actively involves and engages parents in the planning, review, and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school's CEP goals during school leadership meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Principal, administration, all teachers, books, computers, SMART boards, scheduling is organized for effective articulation among the staff across the grades both horizontally and vertically. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 40% of students will exhibit increased academic rigor as measured by advancing one performance level in Go Math and ELA mid-year benchmarks. By February 2019, 55% of classroom tasks and projects along with portfolio work will include evidence of increased rigor and higher order problem-solving work. Reports provided by Imagine Learning will be monitored by teacher teams and the administration; teachers can provide incentives to students individually and/or through class competitions. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Fountas & Pinnell Imagine It mid-year benchmark Go Math/Imagine It mid-year benchmark Classroom tasks/portfolio review, projects Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? We analyzed our Quality Snapshot, School Quality Guide, DOE reports, quantitative and qualitative data, and information on the Quality Review. According to the 2015-2016 School Quality Review, “the school culture is collaborative, supportive, and caring of student needs both academically and social-emotionally, resulting in an environment that is safe and conducive to high levels of learning”. Based upon an analysis of The 2017-2018 NYC School Quality Guide, 97% of students state that they feel safe in their classrooms , 100% of the teachers report that they trust the principal, and more than 96% of the parents feel that the principal works to create a sense of community in the school. Students are known well and supported by the teachers and administration. To increase student achievement, teachers will maximize instructional time and create a respectful environment, foster respectful interactions with and among students, ensuring that students find the classroom a safe place to take intellectual risks thereby allowing all students to achieve their fullest potential. Priorities for 2018-2019: To continue to foster a school culture that supports existing structures to promote healthy social, emotional, and behavioral development of students, thereby increasing student achievement, and assisting all students in making yearly gains and meeting the expectations of the Common Core Learning Standards. To continue to promote consistency in the messaging of expectations, around structures for safety, trust, and student learning. To continue to address and improve chronic absenteeism in Grade 7. Engage parents and family in every aspect of school life so that the entire school community works together to drive student achievement. Support students and families by fostering a culture of collaboration, academic rigor and high expectations for all students. 9  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the attendance rate of Grade 7 students (Grade 6 in June 2018 at 89.6%) will increase by 3% to 92% using a.m. outreach programs and strategies derived from the School Climate training, which will result in 75% of the targeted 7th graders achieving 75% or higher in all four major subject areas on report card grades. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Morning outreach initiatives will target chronic absenteeism, Grade 7 Daily - Sept - June All classroom aimed at improving attendance. High-interest lessons and activities will be designed and instruction will be supplemented with Imagine Learning and Imagine Math (research-based programs) to support targeted students and assist them in keeping up with class requirements. Teachers, identified students Daily - Sept - June teachers, AIS teachers, administration Daily - Sept -June Guidance Counselor, staff Guidance counselor will provide School Climate training for staff and counseling for students. Staff, All students Pre-K -8 All instructional programs are common core aligned. The teacher creates a respectful, orderly and safe classroom environment in an atmosphere that reflects the educational importance of hard work and perseverance for all instructional programs. Teachers, identified students Identified students AIS, in the form of pull-out small group, targeted instruction will be provided to support the needs of all identified grade K- 8 struggling students. ( funded reading, funded math, ICT, SETSS, ENL). The use of iPads and tablets gives opportunities to all students to have a hands on student directed dimension to instruction. All students An after-school program will support the needs of identified students in need of AIS in literacy and Math for grades 3-8, and ENL supports for grades 3-5. All Staff All classroom teachers, coaches, funded reading teacher, AIS teachers, administration Administration, SBST, ICT teacher, SETSS teacher, funded reading and math teachers Oct-June Wed-Thurs Oct-June Saturday Oct-June Bi-monthly Teachers, coaches, administration Monthly All staff, principal, assistant principals, coaches, instructional team 1  A Saturday program will support the needs of identified students in grades 6-8. Sept.-June The teacher or teacher teams monitor student data, measure the impact of AIS supports and work collaboratively with school leaders to modify or add targeted supports as needed. Students are awarded Good Citizen and Student of the Month in addition to Gold and Silver Honor Roll displays. Frequent formal and informal observations of teachers on a regular basis, with feedback. School-wide professional development and training will be provided on linking students to supports, improving positive behavior supports across tiers, restorative circles, conflict resolution groups and connecting schools with community based providers. 2. The instructional programs for students with disabilities, ELLs and other high-need students continue to be aligned with general education, using intervention supports and strategies such as ELL strategies, UDL, strategies, and/or differentiated intervention accommodations. Response to intervention differentiated instruction for ELLs and students with disabilities. Identified students Professional Development Team All staff Weekly PD Sept-June All school leaders, coaches, instructional team ELLs, SWDs, high- needs students Sept.-June Principal, assistant teachers, parent coordinator ELLs, SWDs, 2X Daily high-needs students Sept.-June Principal, assistant teachers, parent coordinator 2  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. From September through June, the principal plans, schedules and organizes and oversees monthly workshops, curriculum nights, family nights, high school and middle school application process assistance and parent-teacher conferences. Parents and members of the school community will be kept current on school initiatives and information regarding student academic growth and social-emotional growth by staff. Workshops will be presented and parents will be better informed on ways to support their child's progress by including specific supports for assisting their children at home.The guidance counselor presents school-based mental health workshops to staff and parents to proactively support and promote the academic growth and emotional health of students. Parents, as well as faculty, will have an opportunity to share ideas/concerns. Information on connecting schools with community-based providers will be disseminated to parents and staff. Parent coordinator will make every effort to provide Information to parents in their native language. Key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight are the principal, guidance counselor, staff, and parent coordinator. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Principal, administration, all teachers including IEP teachers, ICT teachers, books, computers, SMART boards. Purchasing of iPads, tablets, and site licenses to increase ratio of devices to students and instructional support Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 55% of students referred by the PPT will have a formal RTI Plan and will be receiving AIS in ELA and/or Math, resulting in academic growth as measured by student portfolios. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 3  Fountas and Pinnell Imagine IT Literacy and Imagine It Math mid-year benchmark assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. To examine the strengths and weaknesses of our students, we analyzed our Quality Snapshot, School Quality Guide, DOE reports, quantitative and qualitative data, and information on the Quality Review. An analysis of Grade 3-8 NYS ELA Assessment results for ELLs over a two-year period from 2017 to 2018 indicates the following: Results for ELLs indicates a 5% increase in the number of students (9 out of 150) performing at or above a Level 3 (from 1% to 6%). An analysis of Grade 3-8 2018 NYSESLAT Assessment results indicates that 9 out of 150 ELL students were proficient in reading. 35% of students (53 out of 150) increased in level; 50% (75 out of 150) remained on the same level. The overall ELA and NYSESLAT results revealed troubling patterns for ELLs. The performance for many students in this subgroup in all grades is of concern as it represents a disproportionately high percentage of students performing at the lowest levels. School data was analyzed to assess the impact of professional learning and to address our school’s instructional focus and needs. In-house findings from multiple sources of information and walkthroughs were analyzed. The administration and staff worked together to provide additional Professional Development on the NYSESLAT, ELL, differentiated and UDL strategies, in order to meet the needs of the teachers as well as the ENL students. Study groups were formed. Priorities for 2018-2019:  To close the gap in achievement between ENL learners and English proficient students.  To ensure that all students including ENL learners have access to multiple points of entry, scaffolds and content that will support them in meeting the appropriate standards, and improving student outcomes.  To provide additional professional development on the NYSESLAT, differentiated ENL and UDL strategies to meet the needs of the lowest performing third including ELLs and Students with Disabilities. 5   Increase professional development opportunities for teachers around best practices and effective strategies for teaching ENL learners.  Engage parents and family in every aspect of school life so that the entire school community works together to improve student achievement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will provide pull-out/push-in enrichment ENL services, which will result in a 4% increase (from 6% to 10%) in the percentage of students meeting two of the four modalities (Listening, Reading, Writing and Speaking) and increasing one performance level (Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding) as measured by the 2019 NYSESLAT. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Instructional programs in literacy, math, and all subjects are common core aligned. Interventions are incorporated for ELLs and students with special needs and the bottom third students. The Imagine It reading program stresses phonemic awareness, phonics, reading and language arts in a thematic framework as well as promoting acquisition of academic language in all content areas. ENL providers will parallel teaching in a pull-out program during the school day. The impact of ENL supports will be monitored. ENL teachers and classrooms teachers will work collaboratively with school leaders to modify or add targeted supports, as needed. Vertical and horizontal planning for teachers in order to examine student growth, weaknesses, strengths and expectations. After-school program to support the needs of all entering, emerging, transitioning and expanding ENLs in grades 3-5. A Saturday Program will support the needs of ENL students in grades 6-8. Frequent informal observations of teachers on a regular basis, with feedback. ENL students Oct-June Intervisitations for teachers to share and replicate strong practices, learn from one another, and grow professionally. Modeling by curriculum specialists, coaches. All Staff Saturday October-June 7 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Students preK-8 All ENL students All Staff 2X Daily Sept.-June Wed, Thurs All classroom teachers, coaches, funded reading teacher, AIS teachers, administration Principal, ENL teachers Principal, ENL teachers  Professional development will include ENL strategies, and methodologies while maintaining the rigor of the standards by balancing the need for conceptual understanding, incorporating the common core curriculum with language acquisition, response to intervention, special education strategies, UDL, and the use of scaffolding devices. Sept-June Monday PD-Inquiry Team-bi-monthly Principal, Assistant Principal All Staff, administration, Reducing Paperwork Committee 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Throughout the school year, the principal provides opportunities for family participation in school-related events and decisions. He oversees scheduling of monthly workshops, including curriculum nights, family nights, meetings, and parent-teacher conferences. Cultural events and presentations throughout the year accentuate the value of diverse cultures and link the home/school community. The administration, parent coordinator, teachers, parents, and coaches are actively involved in preparing, planning, and reviewing student performance. Parent information sessions, written and verbal information (in the native language to the best extent possible) informs parents of details of meetings, instructional shifts, trends in student performance, the use of scaffolding devices, UDL, and in ways to support student progress. The principal oversees monthly SLT meetings. Meetings are scheduled to accommodate parents' schedules to the best extent possible (both during the school day and in the evening) to promote teacher-parent collaborations and relationships. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 8  ENL teachers, AIS teachers, all staff, administration Common preparation periods After school/ Saturday academy Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Imagine Learning with self-progress monitoring Portfolio review 75% of targeted students will meet their mid-year February benchmarks in their language modalities as measured by informal assessments, Fountas and Pinnell and classroom tests designed to monitor student progress. By the end of February 2019, 90% of teachers (55 out of 61) will have attended at least one PD on ENL strategies and UDL. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Imagine Learning with self-progress monitoring Imagine It Literacy and math midyear benchmarks Quarterly progress reports Portfolio review, midyear benchmarks, classroom tests to monitor student progress Teacher observations Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2016 School Quality Review, we are Well Developed in maintaining a culture of mutual trust and positive attitudes that support the academic and personal growth of students and adults. (3.4) The school culture is collaborative, supportive, and caring of student needs both academically and social-emotionally, resulting in an environment that is safe and conducive to high levels of learning. Based on the analysis of the 2017 NYC Learning Environment Survey, 98% of the teachers agree that the principal makes clear to the staff, students, and families, his expectations for meeting instructional goals. He participates in instructional planning with teams of teachers. 91% of the parents agree that the principal promotes family and community involvement. According to the 2018 PPO, the principal has allocated resources to increase technology to support student learning. He supports teachers to ensure that both the academic and social-emotional needs of the students are being met and is committed to moving the school forward. He conducts classroom observations and collaborates with school leaders to support rigorous instruction and improved teacher practice. The priorities for 2018-2019: Continued support in providing enhanced structures for students social-emotional development, parent engagement and in enhancing teacher pedagogy and teacher practice. Consistent disaggregated school level data for student sub-groups including ELLs and SWDs to support student achievement. Continued support for highly effective teachers/School Leadership Teams as stake holders around school based planning and shared decision makers. 0  Reach out to parents to engage them directly in the processes of strengthening student learning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, one third of the teaching staff (22 out of 61 teachers) will have served in a leadership role, including instructional team facilitator or turn-key trainer, in order to support teacher and build professional capacity, resulting in 75% of targeted students reaching their benchmarks in ELA and Mathematics as measured by the NYS ELA and Mathematics exams. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Principal and stake-holders ensure that each student’s academic and social-emotional development and progress toward meeting the benchmarks, is known and supported by the entire school community. Principal builds a school community characterized by mutual support and respect. The teachers’ talents, dedication, and expertise are recognized and celebrated via feedback and support. Weekly PD support for teachers. All Students Pre-K -8 Sept.-June All students Pre K-8 Administration, staff Sept-Nov Dec-Feb Mar-June Sept-June Administration, teachers, coaches Administration, staff Sept-June Administrators calibrate observations to ensure consistency of actionable feedback. All students Pre K-8 The principal supports and respects teachers’ efforts to improve their practice and to contribute to the life of the school. The teachers who participated in Learning-Centered initiatives in support of rigorous thinking through questioning and discussions, will turn-key the information and develop tasks and generated questions at PD workshops. The principal improves the professional community by Inviting teachers to participate in school committees and learning networks with colleagues and to freely share insights. The principal encourages teachers to take a leadership role in promoting a culture of professional inquiry/study groups. Teachers regularly lead events that positively impact school life. Increased opportunities for teachers to share and replicate strong practices and learn from one another. Teaching staff 2  ELLs, SWDs, high-needs students Sept.-June Administration, AIS teachers, ENL & Special Education teachers, classroom teachers 2. The instructional programs for students with disabilities, ELLs and other high-need students continue to be aligned with general education, using intervention supports and strategies such as ELL strategies, UDL, strategies, and/or differentiated intervention accommodations. Response to intervention differentiated instruction for ELLs and students with disabilities. Provide after school and Saturday academy to promote creativity and confidence for all students including ELLs and students with disabilities. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 3  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The principal and school leaders and staff successfully partner with families to support student progress. The principal schedules workshops, curriculum nights, Family Nights, and parent-teacher conferences. Parents have easy access to teachers and school leaders and there is a two-way communication between the school and families. The parent coordinator actively involves parents in planning, reviewing, and improving student performance. Written and verbal information (in the native language to the best extent possible) is provided to inform parents of ongoing events. Bilingual parents who share a common home language provide translation for families. Additional training opportunities for the parent coordinator will forge stronger relationships with parents. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Coaches Teachers Administration Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-year professional meeting between teacher and principal to reflect on teacher’s growth and create next steps. By February 2019, 11 teachers will have served in a leadership role. 75% of targeted students will reflect the improvements in leadership by achieving mid-year benchmarks in informal assessments, Fountas and Pinnell and classroom tests. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher observations Quarterly progress reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2018 Principal Performance Observation, the principal is “committed to moving the school forward”. To that end the principal has developed relationships with the community, especially with the parents at PS 99. It is clear that he values families, children and their needs. The NYC Learning Environment Survey indicates that 95% of parents are satisfied with the education that their child has received. It is our goal to promote understanding for parents about the expectations of the Common Core Learning Standards in regards to their child’s academic progress. We will provide workshop opportunities which will hopefully increase parent involvement. An analysis of the 2018 Grade 3-8 Math assessment results for all tested students indicate a 5% increase in the number of students who scored at or above a Level 3 (from 39% to 44%). An analysis of the same assessment for Students with Disabilities indicates that 10% of students scored at or above a Level 3. The academic performance of students with disabilities is significantly lower and disproportionate with the general education population. Priorities for 2018-2019  We will strive for academic excellence for all students K-8 in mathematics, with a focus on the performance of the Students with Disabilities in order to close the achievement gap in math between the general education students and those Students with Disabilities.  To build trusting collaborative relationships with families toward establishing effective partnerships that  support student growth. Increase training opportunities for all parents with a focus on mathematics for SWDs to better support their child's education, therefore impacting and increasing student achievement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through ongoing and expanded methods of communication with parents, 75% of targeted special needs students at a Level 1 in Proficiency in ELA, will increase their performance by 5% as measured by the NYS ELA examination. Additionally, as a result of increased parent outreach and communication, the percentage of parents who 5  will agree or strongly agree that families have communicated with their child's teacher about their child's performance will result in an increase of 5% (from 87% to 92%). 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Increased verbal and written communication between All students Sept.-June All classroom teachers, teaching staff Students with Disabilities All Staff, parents Sept.-June Sept-Nov Dec-Feb Mar-June Sept.-June Principal, Assistant principals, coaches, all classroom teachers, AIS teachers, ENL teachers, reading teacher Principal, Assistant principals, coaches, all classroom teachers, school and families in order to update parents about students' progress and provide ways in which the family can support efforts to improve academics. Instructional programs in math are common core aligned and research based. Interventions are incorporated for ELLs and students with special needs and the bottom third students. Intervention supports and strategies such as UDL and differentiated intervention accommodations will be used. Students will utilize self-directed technology in programs such as Imagine It Math and Go Math through online instruction that targets their unique needs. Special Education, ICT and SETSS teachers work with small groups of students to accommodate their needs. Rounds of intervisitation to strengthen specific areas of teacher practice. Grades 1-8 receive Planners which are an organizational tool containing guidelines for students to record and outline academic expectations and responsibilities. This planner enables families to view work assignments for their children. Anti-bullying program to support tolerance and respect. Students are made aware of their responsibilities to care for others. 7  Professional development is consistently provided to staff and parents. 2. An after-school program to address the high-needs students. Saturday program to address the ELLs. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Targeted students Sept.-June Principal, ENL teachers, classroom teachers. If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Regularly scheduled workshops, meetings, curriculum nights, family nights, and conferences are scheduled by the Principal throughout the school year. In alignment with the Framework for Great Schools, PS 99 has fostered partnerships with the Brooklyn Arts Council, which has helped support family and community engagement. Parents attended the performance that the Brooklyn Arts Council sponsored. In addition, Thrive, a school-based mental health consultant program, to improve and promote the mental health of children, is facilitated by the DOE Office of School Health. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent coordinator Translators Workshop materials ICT teachers, Special Education teachers Expert teachers, speakers Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 8  By February 2019, 35% of the students with disabilities will achieve at least one increased level in ELA as measured by classroom benchmarks. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Quarterly progress reports Imagine It math mid-year benchmarks Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Summative/ Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Funded reading Small group/ tutoring formative SETSS assessments ENL program Classroom benchmarks ICT teacher ELLs grades K-8 Teacher recommendation Small group instruction, one-to-one, peer tutoring, Push-in/pull-out, Small group instruction Small group instruction One period a day One period a day After school program Saturday Academy Mathematics Parental input Summative formative assessments Classroom benchmarks Imagine It math- Grades K-8 Small group, tutoring During school day Small group instruction/tutoring One period a day Funded math grades 3-8 After school program SETSS ICT teacher Small group instruction Saturday Academy Small group instruction 0  Teacher recommendation ELLs grades K-8 Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Parental input Regents- content area teachers provide ongoing support to any student who may be struggling in their content area. Content area teachers provide ongoing support to any student who may be struggling in their content area. Teacher recommendation Parental input IEP driven SBST recommendation Intervention/review/test prep Small group instruction During school day Intervention/review/test prep Small group instruction During school day Services are provided for at-risk and crisis situations as they arise. Small group/ or one-to-one During school day Counseling Talk sessions Health related services are provided as prescribed by individual IEP. Intervention 1  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 3 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population.  PS 99 will not deny any student admission due to lack of documentation.  Ensure that all students meet immunization requirements and document the results in ATS.  Display informational materials at the school to encourage the students and families to report homeless  status. Family assistant and attendance teacher with the parent coordinator will act as a liaison to ensure timely registration and attendance.  Provide educational services comparable to those provided to other students in the school.  Provide transportation services comparable to those provided to other students in the school.  Staff members will meet with the families of the students to inform them of their rights and familiarize them with all services provided, such as after school tutorial and after school and summer enrichment programs.  Workshops for parent and other family members. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 3  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. We offer a rigorous and enriched curriculum, participate in job fairs, align with the DOE recruitment center, develop relationships with institutions that offer high quality education programs, promote and advertise a positive school culture and create an environment that promotes high standards. One hundred percent of our teachers are fully licensed to teach the subject that they are assigned to teach. The teachers participate in professional development supporting the implementation of the CCLS in reading and math. PD is ongoing during weekly grade conferences, workshops, faculty conferences, on the following topics: Trends analysis based on teacher observations (On-going), strategies for supporting various sub-groups, use of student data to plan and set goals, DOK, CCLS, Instructional shifts, ESL strategies, text complexity, citywide instructional expectations in literacy and math, observational data and trends identified by the administration, instructional rounds into colleagues’ rooms to highlight best practices specific to ELA and Math that are grounded with the researched rubric included in the new teacher evaluation system. The staff has the opportunity to further their education through approved college courses for additional college credit 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ● To ensure instruction by highly qualified teachers, we will provide weekly professional development in all subject areas, that aligns to state standards, assessments and curriculum.. ● Intervisitations, and modeling best practices by expert teachers for teachers who are new, untenured, or those who are identified for needed support. ● Weekly professional development will be ongoing. All staff will be trained in the new Common Core State Standards (CCSS), use of technology, gathering, disseminating and interpreting data, looking at student work, the use of rubrics 4  and self-assessing, setting and revising goals, ENL strategies and following IEP mandates for Special Education, differentiated learning strategies and standards-based curricula content. ● The staff will collaboratively build a school-wide understanding of the components of the researched rubric for teaching, through PD opportunities provided at grade meetings, faculty conferences, workshops, and lunch and learns. School leaders will support teacher development, paying particular attention to the school’s instructional focus. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). For the 2018- 2019 school year, there will be two full day pre-k classes. The pre-k program facilitates the students’ transition to elementary school-wide programs through highly structured developmentally appropriate informal “play” activities and seamless educational programs. The curriculum includes Core Knowledge, Engage NY (literacy and math) and Image It. These programs are aligned to the Common Core Standards. An interdisciplinary approach Is utilized to develop critical thinking and pre-literacy skills in all curriculum areas. The pre-k program fosters social and emotional development by nurturing socialization skills, independence, and responsibility and awareness of the school environment so that the children are better prepared for a positive kindergarten experience. Two paraprofessionals assist the two teachers daily. A social worker will work with parents one day a week. Workshops are provided to inform parents about their child’s education by a Parent Coordinator. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 5  The open-door policy and strong leadership of the principal and assistant principals, help to create an atmosphere that ensures that PS 99 is a school community of learners whereby all members, students, staff, and parents, are actively engaged in the educational process. The principal uses school resources and budget to promote student learning. All members share accountability for creating a positive and educational environment for improving and achieving success for all students. The working relationship of all members of the school community fosters a consensus building learning community with a commitment to continuous review and improvement. The team is sufficiently diverse to represent the school’s key stakeholders. This group has the credibility it needs to gain widespread support for any plans or decisions. A discussion is a key to making decisions. Professional development is provided weekly to give teachers the opportunity:  To combine ideas on effective lesson design, assessment, questioning and discussion techniques in order to improve pedagogical delivery to improve student achievement for all students.  To understand the appropriate uses of multiple assessment measures and how to use assessment results to improve instruction.  To strengthen their knowledge base in all content areas and to reflect and refine school-based practices. The School Leadership Team (principal, coaches, UFT chapter leader, Special Education liaison, teachers and parents) are the participants and decision makers in the operation of the school. They meet monthly to plan for comprehensive long term improvement, share information on conducting a comprehensive needs assessment of the entire school based on the performance of the students in relation to the State academic standards and develop the comprehensive education plan. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 586,899.00 20, 55700 31822.00 0 5,110,457.00 X X X X X 6 Column B Section Reference(s) Section 4,5,6,7 Section 4,5,6,7 Section 4,5,6,7 Section 4,5,6,7  1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated: 7   Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 8  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy PUBLIC SCHOOL 99 THE ISAAC ASIMOV SCHOOL FOR SCIENCE & LITERATURE The Parental Involvement Plan will be in effect for the 2018-2019 school year. Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 99, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 99’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership 9  Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students PS 99 will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, PS 99 will: Parental Involvement and School Quality ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; 0  ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary School Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; PS 99 will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. PUBLIC SCHOOL 99 School-Parent Compact (SPC) 1  THE ISAAC ASIMOV SCHOOL FOR SCIENCE & LITERATURE PS 99, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum PS 99 will provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act; PS 99 will support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; PS 99 will provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; PS 99 will provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; 3  ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 4  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 5  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: P.S. 99 will provide an After-School Title IIII LEP Program , and a Title III LEP (ENL Middle School) Saturday Academy. The Title III After-School Program and Title III Saturday Academy will provide ENL instruction to ENL students with a primary focus on Literacy and Mathematics. These ENL enrichment programs will assist ENL students to increase language proficiency, Common Core vocabulary and content acquisition for state tests and academic achievement under Federal Law (Title III of "No Child Left Behind Act"). The After-School Title III LEP Language Acquisition will commence on October 17, 2018 and end approximately on April 18, 2019. The students from grades 3 to 8 will meet two hours each session from 2:25 P.M. to 4:25 P.M. for a total of approximately 26 sessions. For students in the Title III LEP (ENL Middle School) Saturday Academy, it will begin on October 20, 2018, and end on May 18, 2019 (23 sessions). The students will meet for three hours, each session starting from 8:30 A.M. - 11:30 A.M., for a total of approximately 43 sessions Materials used for all these programs are supplemental and distinct from those used for daily instruction. The types of materials used for all programs will be "Finish Line for ELL's 2.0 English Proficiency Practice", "Finish Line New York - Math", "Getting Ready For The NYSESLAT", and "Write Source Skills Book". Three certified ENL teachers, will be providing services to ENL students for the After-School Title III LEP Language Acquisition program, and Saturday Academy,two content area teachers. These Title III Programs will supplement the regular mandated ENL instructional services. To assist these students, the supplementary services will have small ten-twelve group student instruction, utilizing English As a New Language strategies and methodologies. A main focus will be to meet the educational strengths, and needs of the student, in order that these students acquire English language skills to meet the age appropriate academic achievement standards of rigor and college readiness by using listening, speaking, reading and writing skills through content area instruction. Teachers work with students to develop positive self-esteem and an understanding of the American culture. Students will be selected based upon the data obtained from the ELL Data Analysis tool (EDAT), which includes the RLAT report indicating three years of NYSESLAT scores breaking down their four modality levels, and which modality they are in need of improving, and their proficiency level, the RNMR report indicating NYSESLAT combined modality report, and the RESI report indicating a student's complete evaluation, including their ELA and Math Assessment Data, At-Risk Level Warning, At-Risk Level Factors, NYSITELL and 6  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information NYSESLAT test taker's Modalities (Listening Speaking, Reading, Writing) Strength and Weakness Modalities in Need of Assistance, to create our targeted groups of students for our After-School Title III Language Acquisition groups, A.I.S. groups, and Middle School Title III Saturday Academy. Attendance records for the Title III Language Acquisition Program, the Middle School Title III Saturday Academy, and the A.I.S. Program will be monitored for every session for each student and will be filed in the main office. Program notification letters in parent's preferred language will be maintained in a file in the ENL department. Translation of program notification for parents, will be obtained through the Translation and Interpretation Unit of the Board of Education. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: . Professional Development will include ENL strategies and methodologies, and incorporating Common Core Curriculum with language acquisition. The New York State ENL Standards will be addressed at Faculty Conferences, Grade Conferences, Teacher Class Intervisitations, ENL Teacher Push-In Modelling, and at After-School Professional Development Sessions. This ongoing training for staff will be provided at no cost to the program. The Schedule for the Professional Development of staff will be from 3:00 P.M. - 3:35 P.M. as follows: September 17, 2018: " Working With ENL Students in the Mainstream Classroom", "Overview of the Imagine Learning Computer Program To Assist Students In The Mainstream Classroom". October 15, 2018 " Common Core Framework for ENL's" November 19, 2018 "Response to Intervention (RTI)" December 10, 2018: " Text Complexity and English Language Learners - Building Vocabulary" January 14, 2019: "Challenges and Opportunities in the English Language Arts Common Core Standards for ELL's" February 11 21019: "Strategies To Assist ENL Students Develop Critical Thinking Skills, Career Readiness and Rigor (Using Scaffolding devices, Schema Building, Think Pair-Share, Bridging, and Text Representation) for the Common Core and ESL Standards" March 11, 2019: "Teaching Vocabulary to English As A New Language Learners - Hands-On Approach to English Language Learning" April 8, 2019 "Test-Taking Strategies for the NYSESLAT and Other State Tests" May 13, 2019: "Using Graphic Organizers To Assist English As A New Language Learners With Reading Comprehension" 7  Part C: Professional Development June 10, 2019: "The Importance of Reading For Language Learners - Assisting Students With Summer Reading" The Professional Development for staff will be a 35 minute session, one day a month for the entire school year, for a total of ten Professional Development days for staff. Training and teaching strategies will be provided by certified ENL teachers. ENL teachers providing Professional Development training to staff members, and working the Title III Program will receive their own training through district workshops provided by the BK South BFSC Department of English Language Learners and Student Support. For each Professional Development, the staff will complete a sign-in sheet, and will be provided with an agenda of the topic for each session. These records will be maintained in the main office with a copy in the ENL department. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: . Parents will be provided support at workshops that will be conducted by the ENL teachers to assist parents, and their children in the transitiion into the school, and academic achievement. These workshops will be conducted after-school from 2:30 P.M. - 3:30 P.M. , for a total of 10 sessions. Each session will be an hour. The workshop will take place one per month. Translated family letters will inform parents of activities and workshops going on in school. Communications, such as informational letters, memos, and workshops will be in their native languages translated by the Board of Education Translation and Interpretation Unit. Students and parents will participate in collaborative activities, at no cost to the Title III Program, to utilize oral and written English language, not only in school activities and workshops, but in the home as well. The following dates will be the parent workshops for the school year: September 25th, 2018: "Introduction - Welcome and Preparing Our Children For The New School Year" October 16th, 2018: "Understanding The Identification Process For ENL's and Completion of Proper Forms" November 20, 2018: "Homework Without Tears" December 18, 2018; "Using The Imagine Learning Program In The Home" January 15, 2019: "Understanding The Core Curriculum and ESL Standards" 8  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities February 26, 2019: "Ideas For Supporting Literacy In The Home" March 19, 2019: "Take-Home Hands-On Activities To Develop A Strong Link Between Home And School" April 16, 2019: "Test-Taking Strategies For The NYSESLAT And Other State Tests" May 21, 2019: "Fostering Learning Through Summer Vacation" June 18, 2019: "The Importance Of Reading For Language Learners - Working With Your Children For Summer Reading" Invitations to Parent Workshops will be translated in parent's preferred languages through the Board of Education Translation and Interpretation Unit. Agendas will be distributed for each parent workshop session, and sign-in attendance sheets will be provided. These records will be filed in the main office with a copy in the ENL department. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Grades 7&8 Middle School Saturday Academy for ENL's Grades 3-8 After-School Language Acquisition 1 supervisor per session 86x5244=$54.59 2 teachers with fringe 86 ea (.x 50.13) 3 teachers with fringe 78 ea. (x 50.13) $19094.00 Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other $6364.00 Books - "Finish Line For ELLs 2.0 English Proficiency Practice." "Finish Line New York Math" 9 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. TOTAL parent involvement $3182.00 PD $3182.00 0  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 21 School Name Isaac Asimov School Borough Brooklyn School Number 099 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Gregory Pirraglia Coach T. Plotsker ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Sheryl Schiffman Teacher/Subject Area Susan Deasy Teacher/Subject Area Tina Scarlino Related-Service Provider Henry Linden/SETTS Superintendent Isabel DiMola Assistant Principal Jeanine Kucher Coach M. Maniscalco School Counselor Connie Speirs Parent Jennifer Impocco Parent Coordinator Stephanie Vero Field Support Center Staff Member Nelly Cortes Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 3.7 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 880 1 Total number of ELLs 257 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 29.20%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): N/A If yes, indicate language(s): N/A Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 4 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The assessment tool that the school uses to assess early literacy skills for the ELL's is Fountas and Pinnell. Our students in kindergarten are having difficulty with segmenting, blending, sound recognition, and rhyming. While the students in grades 1-4 are struggling with reading and oral expression and writing. Students in K-3 are having difficulty with decoding, sight words, reading accuracy, oral expression, spelling, vocabulary, writing development, and writing expression. With this information, teachers will plan their instruction emphasizing the skills of segmenting, rhyming, blending, for the kindergarten students, while emphasis for instruction for students in grades one to four will be based on decoding, sight words, reading accuracy, oral expression, writing development and writing expression, spelling, and vocabulary. At the beginning of the school year in October, and middle, teachers administer benchmark assessments from the Imagine It/Open Court reading program. Towards the end of the year, in May another benchmark assessment from the Imagine It/Open Court reading program is administered to see how students have progressed. Four sample writing pieces are given to all students throughout the year covering genres of narrative, opinion, and a baseline informative piece. Three math performance tasks are given in October, March, 2  and May, from the Go Math program. The ELA and Math state exam scores are analyzed at the beginning of the school year for instructional planning, as well as NYSITELL and NYSELAT scores. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The structures that we have in place at PS 99 are small group instruction, and working in pairs targeting skills, differentiation, and scaffolding. Students will also utilize the Imagine Learning computer program for ENLs. Exit flips and different levels of the same task will be administered. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of our programs for our ENLs at P.S. 99 are evaluated by the amount of students that progress in their proficiency levels in the four modalities of Speaking, Reading, Writing, and Listening obtained by their scores on the NYSESLAT examinations, and ENLs making annual year's progress on state math and reading tests. Baseline/benchmark Imagine It/Open Court assessments, Go Math performance tasks are being used to identify base-line, progress, and areas of need. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the summative data has been gathered and analyzed, PS 99 designs and implements targeted supplemental supports. These supports are monitored for progress over time and plans for mid-course corrections for achievement at the classroom level are examined once again. The students are provided with small group instruction and are offered after-school programs and Saturday Academy for intervention. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] According to the Response To Intervention Planning and the data obtained from ENLs, Tier 1 Intervention will be with the general education teacher, and an ENL teacher using Common Core instruction or strategies and differentiation to meet the needs of all students to ensure positive outcomes for all ENLs. For those ENLs that are struggling, intervention will be initiated with a Title I reading teacher in a push-in or pull-out setting with small group instruction in an additional 20-30 minute supplemental opportunities. Based on data review, and anecdotal records ELL students that are still struggling will be given additional support with the SETTS teacher in a pull-out individualized or small group setting tailored to the student's needs.. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. After analyzing the data patterns across proficiency levels (on the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT as well as the EDAT) and grades, it is noted that students at P.S. 99 scored mostly at the Entering, Emerging level in Reading and Writing, and more on the Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding level for the Listening and Speaking modalities. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The NYSITELL and NYSESLAT provides level tests for determining students' language proficiency in relation to the expectations at that point in the schools year. ENL periodic assessments provide PS 99 teachers with information about students' strengths and needs and English language development to help plan individual and group instruction. Analyzing data from the EDAT report and benchmark assessments during grade conferences and professional development ensures that programmatic adjustments are made . Part IV: ELL Programming 3  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. P.S. 99 provides instruction for academic language development to English as New Language Learners(ENLs) in accordance with CR Part 154.2 in a pull-out/push-in organizational model. ELLs will receive instruction in the pull-out/push-in mode in heterogeneous groups, according to their grade level. Students scoring on the proficiency level of Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding are serviced in a push-in organizational mode four times a week. The additional 180 minutes needed for the Entering and Emerging students are provided by the certified ENL teacher in a pull-out mode four times a week. Certified ENL teachers working in an integrated model classroom articulate weekly on topics, to assist subject teachers on best practices and ENL strategies and methodologies. This is done during common preps and grade conferences. Students are grouped according to mixed proficiency levels. b. TBE program. If applicable. n/a c. DL program. If applicable. n/a 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? P.S. 99 provides instruction for academic language development to English Language Learners (ENL's) in accordance with CR Part 154.2. ENLs who are Entering and Emerging levels are targeted to receive 360 minutes per week instruction or two units of study, one unit in ENL and one unit in ELA in the pull-out/push-in mode. Those ENLs that are Transitioning and Expanding receive one unit of study of ENL or 180 minutes and a unit of study of English Language Arts in the pull-out/push-in mode according to their grade level, also Commanding students will be serviced for 90 minutes of integrated ENL or small-group learning, individualized targeted learning, and project-based learning. This group instruction enables the funded teacher to focus on specific skills and help the struggling students. Lessons are modeled for the classroom teacher. Test-taking skills are worked on. Articulation occurs between the ENL teachers and classroom teachers. ENL professional development is ongoing. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All students are taught in English, using techniques and strategies, such as extensive use of visuals and repetition to promote oral language development. The four skills of listening, speaking, reading, and writing are included every day. Content area teachers working with ENL's have received 7 1/2 hours of staff development on integrated ENL teaching. Team teaching between subject areas and ENL teachers is employed in the classroom. The program specifically addressed the Chancellor's Recommendations on aligning instructional programs for ENLs to the Comprehensive Core Curriculum in Literacy and Mathematics. All English Language Learners (ELL students) in grades K-8 receive literacy enriched instructional programs in accordance with the Common Core Learning Standards, and are provided with equal access to programs designed for the entire school population. ENL teachers organize and design language instruction around the content area subjects of reading, writing, social studies, science, music, art, literature, and mathematics using a whole language, thematic approach. Emphasis is placed on utilizing student's prior knowledge, learning styles and cultural backgrounds as building blocks of instruction. Concepts, literacy skills, and critical thinking strategies continue to be developed in all areas to form the basis of language acquisition. The classroom teacher provides AIS for ELL students with activities specifically designed, in collaboration 4  with the ENL teacher, to maximize higher levels of academic achievement in literacy and math. This ensures that school goals and expectations are met by all students. At parent workshops, teachers instruct parents in literacy skills and parents have the opportunity to network with other parents and feel a sense of ownership in their child's education to acquire the English proficiency and the academic, cognitive and cultural knowledge they need for academic rigor and college readiness to become active participants in the community. For students to meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards, teachers at PS 99 articulate content and language objectives. They integrate research-based vocabulary instruction. Teachers provide opportunities for students to discuss content with peer, and use research-based practices for instruction such as media, visuals, and graphic organizers. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their native languages by having them utilize glossaries on state exams and word by word dictionaries. ELLs will be administered state exams in translated versions if available in their languages. Classroom libraries incorporate books in various languages to support student's native languages. The Imagine Learning software program utilizes and supports various languages to evaluate students acquisition of the English language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 6a. There is one ELL student identified as Student With Interrupted Formal Education for this year. For any future SIFE students, emphasis will be on understanding phoneme connected to print phonemic awareness, being able to decode unfamiliar words, attaining background knowledge and vocaulary to increase reading comprehension, developing strategies to construct meaning from print-comprehension, and developing and maintaining the motivation to read. The instructional program for SIFE students will focus understanding of math concepts, strategies and skills that are connected to everyday life, attaining background knowledge to foster math ability. 6b. For ENLs in a U.S. school less than three years (newcomers), the Imagine Learning English computer program engages students, and also supports them in their native language, if available, in vocabulary, phonics and phonemic awareness, letter recognition, listening comprehension, reading fluency, reading comprehension and academic vocabulary which will be utilized for struggling ENL students academic achievement on state exams. The English Language Learners Support Guide to the "Imagine It" /"Open Court" reading program differentiates the reading program and skills in accordance with the proficiency level for ENLs who have been in US schools less than three years (newcomers). It is designed to help students acquire social and academic skills through content-based instruction. The program stresses phonemic awareness, phonics, reading and language arts in a thematic framework, and also promotes acquisition of academic language in content areas - social studies, science, and math, while developing reading and writing skills. 6c. The following academic intervention services will be utilized for those ENL students Developing, receiving service 4-6 years these intervention services will incorporate various ENL methodologies and strategies in the improvement of and for meeting the performance goals in writing which these students lacked as indicated by their NYSESLAT scores. In order to assist ENL students who are having difficulty writing in English, we plan to have the students: engage in collaborative writing activities by placing them in groups to create and respond to literature, work in small groups and in writing process groups, writing using the conventions and features of American English which include appropriate grammar, vocabulary, correct spelling, punctuation, and capitalization. Children will develop their writing skills further with the use of graphic organizers and visual aids, such as charts, Venn diagrams, semantic webs, and story maps, children will develop additional spelling skills to aid in their written communication. Children will develop skills in the composing process by writing for a variety of purposes and audiences such as personal journals, reports, personal narratives, responses and reactions to literature, and creating new endings and beginnings to stories. Intervention services for those ENL students recommended for meeting the performance goals in Listening, P.S. 99 plans to have: students participate in practice test-taking skills from past state exams, children will develop these skills further by listening to reading comprehension passages orally, and respond to various questions pertaining to the readings, students will further develop their listening skills by completing note-taking exercises from various reading sources, in addition, students will summarize various genres from literary cassettes at listening centers. The Imagine It /Open 5  Court Reading Program's Intervention strand and English Language Support strand will provide the extra help students need to develop fluency in comprehension, language arts and phonemic awareness. The intervention strand provides students with instructional support of critical skills and strategies in decoding, comprehension, and language arts. d. P.S. 99s plan for long-term ENLs (completed 6 years) is an ENL Saturday Academy Title III program, to build content area and academic vocabulary and rigor through reading comprehension using "Finish Line for ELLS - English Language Profiency 2.0 " for reading and Finish Line Math as resource activity guides. The books promotes reading skills and strategies through various graphic organizers and other word skill exercises, comprehension questions and writing activities. The program will also provide long term ENLs with practice and strategies in the NYSESLAT exam which is administered in the Spring, utilizing the "Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT" review books e. For continuing transitional support (2 Years) for ENLS reaching Commanding on the NYSESLAT, and former ENL students who have achieved the Commanding level as required on the NYSESLAT, will be permitted to have testing accommodations of time and one-half on all exams for up to 2 years after testing out, and must continue to receive services for an additional 2 years for 90 minutes per week of integrated ENL, project-based learning, individualized targeted learning, and small-group learning. In addition to transitional support testing accommodations, Commanding ENLs will be offered an after-school program to enhance their reading comprehension skills and mathematical problem-solving skills. During the mandated 90 minute instruction required for ENL Commanding students, they will be given differentiated instruction on vocabulary skills, writing skills, and mathematical problem-solving skills. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELL-SWDs use the instructional material called "Expeditionary", an English Language Development program that provides extensive language acquisition support for students. Lessons in "Expeditionary" provide a foundation from which English learners can access core content. "Expeditionary" lessons address one or more of the following: Theme, Genre, Literary Element, Reading Skills and Strategies. It provides English language development instruction that supports the instructional grade-level content of the language arts program. The English language development will help ensure mastery of English at each grade level. Instructional lessons and strategies are provided to address Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding, Commanding students. Opportunities are provided for whole group, small group, and partner discussions. Sentence frames offer students strong support to help them grow into the next language profiency level. Scaffolding helps students pass the Transitioning barrier. The language for instruction for reading, language arts, social studies, and science is taught, practiced, and applied. Students discuss and apply academic language in speaking, listening, reading, and writing activities. Teachers of ELLs-SWD utilizes the Intervention and English Language Learner support component to the "Imagine It"/"Open Court" reading program which differentiates all levels of proficiency and struggling students with all skills. . 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? P.S. 99 ELL-SWDs are pulled-out with other ENL students whom are within their grade and proficiency level and are serviced the appropriate instructional minutes. Also, PS 99 mainstreams ENL SWDs into content- area subject classes to achieve their IEP goals and attain English Proficiency within the least restrictive environment. Teachers must continually monitor to ensure that instruction is adjusted to meet the needs of students and learners. Continuous use of assessments must be used to monitor the effectiveness of the supports to determine whether a student is making gains as expected and to make corrections as needed. Teachers at PS 99 meet at grade conferences to discuss outcome assessment, data analysis, and provide adjustments to their programs for student ENL progress. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Funded reading, writing, and math intervention services will be provided for struggling ENLs, along with SETTS intervention for those ENLs with IEPs. An AIS, after school, and Saturday program for those students considered to be "at risk" will be 6  provided. These interventions will be offered in the English language. The materials used for this program will be Finish Line Reading and Finish Line Math. In addition to ENL instruction, students in all subgroup (inclusive of the bottom performing third) who are evaluated as needing more support are placed in AIS Math and ELA small group intervention classes. Those students who are on the proficiency level of Entering or Emerging receive additional targeted assisstance in the subject areas. In addition, AIS providers also target intervention in the areas of Social Studies and Science, particularly with relation to reading comprehension and writing in response to non-fiction reading in the content areas. Native language support is offered in intervention groups through the use of bilingual glossaries in the content areas, as well as internet support using translated texts wherever possible. Imagine Learning is an individualized computer programs that the students also use. These programs support individual needs and reinforce skills through the content area. SIFE (Students with Interrupted Formal Education) and Newcomers will receive small group targeted instruction from the classroom teachers as well as the ENL teacher. They will also receive individual tutoring from cluster teachers, parent volunteers, student teachers, and other pedagogues. Long Term ENL students and ENLs who are in the program between 4 and 6 years will receive small group targeted instruction, individual tutoring and Academic Intervention Services. These students may also receive referrals for evaluations to determine if services other than ENL are necessary. If it is determined that the students need special education services, they may receive Collaborative Team Teaching, Special Education Teacher Support Service and/or counseling. Another intervention program for ENLs struggling with math will be introduced this year, Imagine Learning Math and Imagine Learning Basic Facts will assist students who are struggling with math topics and basic math facts. ENL subgroups which will be targeted are those with IEPS, at-risk, struggling and long-term students. English is the language in which these intervention services is offered. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? "Language Power" for grades K-8 empowers language learners to build English Language proficiency with high differentiation and rich instruction. The program supports high-interest texts that have strong visual support and text -to- picture match, simple vocabulary, and language structure for entering and emerging students. There is a wider variety of text organization and more complex language structure with content related vocabulary for entering and transitioning students. For the expanding and commanding students this program has text complexity to build high-level vocabulary and language skills. The program supports advanced listening and speaking skills and shows strong models for developing grade appropriate writing skills. Text sets provide rigorous instruction with high-interest texts and organized around common themes. "Focused Reading" will be utilized for grades 6-8 and is a program that bridges the gap between struggling and proficient readers through focused instruction of key literacy skills and strategies. This program specifically addresses key reading and language skills that align to Common Core and other state standards with exposure to a wide range of fiction and non- fiction text. This program gives the ENL teacher the opportunity to use multiple strategies to process text, and focus on language development. English is Fun, an ESOL workbook, will be utilized for newcomers and beginners for the acquisition of vocabulary. "Write Source Skills Book" provides the student with opportunities to practice editing and proofreading skills. The series focuses on the mechanics of writing (including punctuation), usage and spelling. "Imagine Math and Imagine Math Facts " is a computer math program for those ENL students struggling with basic math skills, and to improve their state math assessment levels. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. The ESL teacher serves as advisor and student advocate in the school for all ENLs. Students are encouraged to participate in all aspects of school life (music, the arts, athletics, social events), and ENLs are invited to participate with clarification and encouragement from the ESL teacher and administration. The ENL teacher and Parent Coordinator make every effort to communicate opportunities for the schoolwide enrichment programming open to all students. Through the use of Title III funding, ENLs are afforded the opportunity to participate in a Saturday Academy school enrichment programs in math and language enrichment for grades 6-8, an after-school program for grades 3-5. Parent workshops and English language tutorials are also offered to families. 7  12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The instructional materials used in the ENL Program include: ENL classroom libraries (Kindergarten through Grade Eight), Oxford Picture Dictionaries and Content Picture Dictionaries with workbooks, Scholastic Children’s Dictionaries, Steck-Vaugn Vocabulary Connections - A Content Area Approach, Flash - Grammar and Writing, Imagine It/ Open Court Photo Library. The ENL teacher uses technology such as the Smartboard, Google Translator and the Imagine Learning Computer Program, internet resources, graphic organizers, charts, literature, poetry, and music appreciation, and NYSESLAT preparation materials. Students use laptop computers in all groups and tablets. Instructional materials are differentiated according to age and proficiency level. Hands-on projects are stressed overall, and the use of manipulatives are standard for all sub-groups. All resources are age and proficiency level appropriate. Also being used is Language Power, Finish Line for ENLs 2.0, Wonders Your Turn, Writing Source Skills Book, Focus Reading, and English is Fun. In the coming year, the ENL Department has a goal to expand the use of technology in the ENL classroom, as well as to provide additional enrichment, remediation, and support for ENLs in their own classroom environment. The school currently uses programs for English Language Learners such as Imagine Learning and the goal for the coming year is to continue to devote more class time for students, as well as to use the data analysis of the programs to target areas of individual need. While the use of technology in the classroom is definitely a positive addition to the classroom, the ENL teacher will continue to evaluate the use of current software and other web sources. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? As mentioned earlier, native language support is given regularly to ENLs, particularly those Newcomers and SIFE students as they transition into their new environment. Online translation tools, glossaries, picture dictionaries, audio books, and native language editions of literature are among the regular support given. Translation and bi-lingual support is also made available whenever possible. Students' literacy skills are easily transferred from a first to a second language, therefore we encourage the use of an ENL's native language in our program to build a connection between home and school, and enhance the second language by making content comprehensible. Families are encouraged to read and talk in the family's native language if it is strongest. It will give their children the richest possible language foundation and advance both students' native as will as English Language acquisition in academic and social situations enriching their understanding. Peers that speak the same language as a new language learner are encouraged to "buddy read" and converse during formal (classroom/library) and informal (lunch/recess) opportunities. In addition, students may be given projects to do together with a parent or older sibling in the home language. This serves to communicate that maintenance of the home language and native literacy skills are important and also involves family members in the substance of in-school work. Students with sufficient literacy skills use bilingual dictionaries. Oral interpretation, written translation, and software in native languages and English is also used. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Students use laptops, computers in all groups. Instructional materials are differentiated according to age, grade level, and proficiency level. Hands-on projects are stressed overall. and the use of manipulatives are a standard for all sub-groups. All resources are language and proficiency level appropriate. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). The ENL teacher and Parent Coordinator and school guidance counselor lead an orientation session during those first two days of school that aims to inform families about the ENL program, demonstrate instructional practices and assists them with any 8  questions they may have. The school makes every effort to support newly enrolled ENLs before the beginning of the school year. At registration, the family is given a packet of resources including community organizations and other outside programs for enrichment and language instruction prior to the start of school. The school also invites ENL participants to workshops for continued English language support. The students are also given summer reading assignments so that they don't lose the skills they have already acquired in addition to having the opportunity to continue to make progress. ENL parents are given a Parent Orientation meeting by certified ENL teachers for newly enrolled ENLs throughout the year. Videos in native languages, provided by the Board of Education explaining the different types of programs offered are shown. The school guidance counselor has meetings throughout the school year for newly enrolled ENLs for the Middle School admission process, and for the High School admission process. Newly enrolled ENL students are taken on a tour of a middle school and high school to expose them to these new upcoming environments. She also has meetings for Career Day and brings in key speakers. The guidance counselor has sessions for newly enrolled ENLs for Unity Day and Respect for All Week. She also encourages newly enrolled ENLs to tryout for, and participate in the yearly Talent Show which showcases their talents. Certified ENL teachers, conference with newly enrolled ENLs throughout the year to assist in their adjustment both socially and academically. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? This year, PS 99 offered Italian as a language elective. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not Applicable Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? English Language Learners and culturally diverse classrooms are the norm at PS 99. All teachers of ENLs, as well as the assistant principal, paraprofessionals, guidance counselor, school psychologist, related service providers (OT, PT), speech therapists, school secretary, and parent coordinator, have attended and participated in professional development opportunities specifically targeted for teaching ENL students. Teachers who have been attending on-going professional development continue to read ancillary materials and share resources with new teachers of ELL students. The principal has made ELL instruction a priority and has encouraged teachers to pursue additional professional credits in the area of second language instruction. Certified ENL teachers will provide professional development to instruct teachers in ways to help the ENL student. Professional Development will include ENL strategies for all grades. The New York State ENL standards will be addressed at faculty conferences, grade conferences, and at after-school professional development sessions. ENL teachers whom have participated in the "Quality Teaching for English Language Learners", workshop (QTEL)will turnkey to all new teachers the various strategies, methodologies, and activities learned. Intensive professional development in the understanding and use of specialized instructional strategies to meet the needs of ENLs. All teachers, will become familiar with and use the reading strategies that are scientifically based research in the six 9  dimensions of reading: 1) understanding how phonemes (speech sounds) are connected to print-phonemic awareness; 2)being able to decode unfamiliar words; 3) being able to read fluently; 4) attaining background knowledge and vocabulary to foster reading comprehension 5) developing appropriate active strategies to construct meaning from print-comprehension; and 6) developing and maintaining motivation to read. The ENL teachers will have professional development for the entire staff each year so that all personnel are made aware of the components of the ENL Program, current data trends, and new methodologies, as follows: Sept 17- Identifying ENL Students Oct 15-Data Review of Lab R and NYSESLAT Nov 19- Language Acquisition & Proficiency Dec 10-Imagine Learning Program/ strength and weaknesses of program Jan 14- NYSESLAT overview Feb 11- Disciplinary Literacy for ENLs Mar 11- ESL Methodologies Apr 8- How can we prepare the ENL student for state exams May 13- ENL Students Transitioning to higher class level June 10- Enrichment for ENLs Teachers that have ELL students are notified in June for the upcoming year about the number of ENL's they will have in their room. Time is designated for school staff to meet individually with the ENL teacher during the first 2 days of professional development to review data and to see if there are any new ENL admits. The ENL teacher provides support, materials, ideas, and strategies to help teachers support the ENL's in their classroom. School leaders meet individually with classroom teachers to review data and check progress on ELL students. If professional development is available through the network, school leaders will send these teachers for additional support and training. The ENL teacher offers additional professional development during faculty and grade conferences throughout the school year. Communication is vital to successful transitioning at P.S. 99. Being a K-8 school, teachers and administrators strive to make the ENL transition a successful experience through articulation and orientation of students as they make the change to the upcoming grade. Students transitioning to the P.S. 99 (the school's middle school 6-8 component) also take part in an orientation. The guidance department is an integral part in the high school transition. Students are guided through the application process, and given information and study skill training to prepare for the demands of the new year. All ENL students are part of this process, and the ENL teacher reinforces the information to ENL students, offering clarification and translated information to families if needed. The ENL teacher participates in workshops and seminars throughout the year and turnkeys this information to the staff at regular monthly faculty conferences and other professional development sessions to provide the required 7.5 hours of professional development. Sign-in sheets and agendas reflect topics and participation. All personnel receive this professional development. The continued focus for this year is on literacy instruction and how to improve strategies for a more rigorous and challenging curriculum for ENLs in order that they may be competitive with Non-ELL counterparts in their educational career and beyond. This is in alignment with the Common Core State Standards. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Professional development for all teachers at PS 99 will be dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ENLs. 0  ENL personnel will attend various workshops which will be provided by the network in supporting ENLs as they engage in the common core learning standards. Every teacher is involved in professional development activities during professional planning periods (1X week), grade level meetings, designated city-wide professional development days, and additional 1/2 days specific to PS 99. The ENL teacher is involved in the planning of all professional development to ensure that teachers meet language learners linguistics and academic needs. Teachers easily meet the required 7.5 hours of ENL training over the course of the school year. Files of attendance and agendas for these various meetings are maintained by the principal and assistant principal. Guidance counselor participates in professional development workshops given by ENL teachers on transitioning students from elementary to middle school, and/or middle to high school. Professional Development for teachers is ongoing, with agendas and attendance sign-off sheets kept in the ENL office. The 7 1/2 hours of ENL will be provided for all new incoming teachers. Content area teachers working with ENLs have received 7 1/2 hours of staff development on integrated ENL teaching. Feedback/evaluation sheets are reviewed and kept in binders by the principal. P.S. 99 meets the required 15% ELL- specific professional development for all teachers as per CR Part 154.2 by having ENL workshops during Monday's professional development day. These workshops will be provided by certified ENL teachers turn-keying important ENL topics. P.S. 99 meets the required 50% ELL specific professional development for ENL/bilingual teachers as per CR Part 154.2 by having the ENL staff attend district ENL workshops. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In addition to the mandated parent/teacher conferences, and initial parent orientation, teachers at PS 99 meet with parents once a week on Tuesdays for parent outreach meetings, to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency, assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. There is always the availability of a teacher and para as translators. Teachers at PS 99, also utilize the Translation and Interpretation Unit as a means for parents that do not speak or understand English. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parent contact and phone logs are kept for annual individual meetings with ELL parents as well as outreach to ensure parents' needs are accommodated. Regularly scheduled parent workshops will be conducted by the ENL teachers to participate in activities to see and use both oral and written language, not only in school. Parents will be given easy to understand ideas for supporting and promoting literacy in the home. Take home hands on activities to develop a strong link between home and school will be distributed to involve families in their childrens' literacy learning. PTA meetings and parent workshops and conferences foster ENL parent involvement. Also, class meetings foster ENL parent involvement. In addition class trips, recreational activities, such as Carnival Day, and school snack day. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 1  2 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Gregory Pirraglia, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 3  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 99 School DBN: 21K099 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Gregory Pirraglia Title Principal Jeanine Kucher Assistant Principal Stephanie Vero Parent Coordinator Sheryl Schiffman ENL/Bilingual Teacher Jennifer Impocco Parent Susan Deasy Tina Scarlino T. Plotsker M. Maniscalco Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Connie Speirs School Counselor Isabel DiMola Nelly Cortes Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 4  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 21K099 School Name: P.S. 99 Superintendent: Isabel DiMola The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Sheryl Schiffman ENL Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. To assess our school's written translation and interpretation needs, to ensure that all parents are provided with appropriate and timely information in a language they can understand, we surveyed the parents at the ENL Parent Orientation Meetings that is held within 10 days for the new incoming students. We continue to review all data available including the school report card, home language surveys. In addition, our meetings with new parents continue to support the finding that the number of non-English speaking parents is increasing. Very often, a student is not considered an ENL after screening and subsequent LAB testing; yet one or more parent at home speaks a language other than English. Our Parent Coordinator has created a data base of parents who prefer communications in a language other than English, which was collected during the registration process. This list is increasing.. We make every effort to provide translated documents and interpretation services to these families. The Office of Translation and Interpretation's data base also proves to be a viable resource for written communications as well as telephone interpretation. In addition, bilingual staff provides translated communities whenever possible for other "in-house" writing. Predominant languages in our community include: Urdu, Russian, Spanish, Uzbek, Tadzhik, Chinese. 5  Additional ways to collect preferred language data are: the RPOB ATS report and the RCPL ATS report, RAPL ATS report, Blue Card data, Parent surveys, and teacher surveys collected by class. We survey the needs and capabilities of the parents at PTA meetings and parent workshops held at the school. We also review the home language survey from questions 5-8 which asks: "What language is spoken at home most of the time? and "What language does the child speak with parents most of the time?" We also interpret data in the language breakdown of ENL students, and when analyzing the school's report card we focus on the school's percentage of ethnicity, recent immigrants, and recent immigrant's place of birth. P.S. 99 supports all parents that speak another language other than English regardless if their child is an ELL or not, by providing them with teachers and a paraprofessional translator. It is indicated also on the Blue Emergency Contact card for parents to fill out whether they prefer oral and written, translations for any contact, and notices. Important notes, bulletins, and PTA notices will be translated through the online translator services accessed through the Board of Education, to meet the written and oral needs of all parents at P.S.99. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred 10 13 26 60 0 6 3 0 738 1 2 277 167 2 13 179 1 77 Percent Written 0.63 0.83 1.65 3.81 0 0.38 0.19 0 46.86 0.06 0.13 17.59 10.6 0.13 0.83 11.37 0.06 4.89 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. According to the list of parents' preferred languages provided in the previous question, Urdu, Russian, and Spanish, represent at least a 10% population of our school. The Uzbeki language is a little below the 10% population of our school. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 6  1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families The documents that the school typically disseminates every year that require translations are ENL Parent Orientation Meetings, ENL Entitlement Letters, Non-Entitlement Letters, Continued Entitlement Letters, and NYSESLAT Tested-Out Letters, Home Language Surveys, Parent Workshops, Parent-Teacher Conference Announcements, Parent Outreach Notices, After-School and Saturday Academy Program Information, New York State Testing Dates, General Overview of Student's Curriculum, PTA Notices and Meetings. All these documents will be distributed to families throughout the school year. September 12, 2018 and throughout the school year. October 2018-April 2019 March 2019 How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. ENL entitlement letters, Non-Entitlement letters, Continued Entitlement letters, along with Parent Selection Survey and Program Forms, and Home Language Surveys will be printed from the State website in translated forms and distributed to the parents as needed. Parent workshops, Parent-Teacher Conference announcements, Parent Outreach Notices, After-School and Saturday Academy Program Information will be translated by skilled teachers in the school that speak dual languages NYSESLAT information parent guide and brochure will be distributed before Speaking modality is administered in April to inform parents about the exam. The exam will be printed from the state website in various languages required for the parents to understand the importance of this exam. Overview of student's curriculum, PTA notices and meetings will be translated by skilled teachers that speak another language in the school. Throughout school year. For languages needed that skilled teachers are not able to translate, the school will utilize the Translation and Interpretation Unit to translate these documents for parents. ENL LETTERS SEPTEMBER 12, 2018 STATE WEBSITE TRANSLATED COPIES 7  PTA NOTICES THROUGHOUT THE YEAR SKILLED TEACHERS AND PARAPROFESSIONALS NYSESLAT TESTING INFORMATION MARCH 2019 STATE WEBSITE TRANSLATED COPIES 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide The formal face-to-face meetings our school will typically have with parents throughout the school year will be parent-teacher conferences, parent-teacher grade curriculum day meetings, Parent Outreach meetings, Informal interactions that may occur with parents during the school year, dean calls to parents, Middle School Admission workshops, High School Admission Workshops. Parents preferred languages are English, with some requesting Urdu and Russian translation. This also applies for Face to Face and translated documents. October 5, 2018 - Middle School Admissions Process and Completion of Applications. October 2018 - District 21 Admissions. interpretation service(s)? Skilled teachers whom speak another language. Over-the- Phone Interpretation Services which offer the ability to communicate with a parent with the assistance of an interpreter on the phone. Translated Admission Handbooks. November 20, 2018 - PTA meeting and Parent Worshop on Imagine Learning Computer Program. January 15, 2019 - Understanding the Core Curriculum and ENL standards. February 26, 2019 Teaching Vocabulary Using Translated Glossaries to Promote English Proficiency. March 19, 2019 - Ideas For Supporting Literacy In The Home. April 16, 2019 - Take Home Hands-On Activities To Develop A Strong Link Between Home and School. Skilled teachers whom speak another language. Over-the- Phone Interpretation Services which offer the ability to communicate with a parent with the assistance of an interpreter on the phone. Translated Admission Handbooks. Interpretation being used for the Imagine Learning Program will be the native language support provided by the program. Skilled teachers whom speak another language. Over-The- Phone Interpretation Services which offer the ability to 8  June 18, 2019 - Avoiding The Summer Slip communicate with a parent with the assistance of an interpreter on the phone. Skilled teachers whom speak another language. Over-The-Phone Interpretation Services which offer the ability to communicate with a parent with the assistance of an interpreter on the phone. Translated Word to Word Glossaries Skilled teachers whom speak another language. Over-the-Phone Interpretation Services which offer the ability to communicate with a parent with the assistance of an interpreter on the phone. Skilled teachers whom speak another language. Over-the-Phone Interpretation Services which offer the ability to communicate with a parent with the assistance of an interpreter on the phone. Skilled teachers whom speak another language. Over-the-Phone Interpretation Services which offer the ability to communicate with a parent with the assistance of an interpreter on the phone. 9  Admission Process Oct. 6, 2018 Imagine Learning Nov. 20, 2018 Understanding Core Curriculum January 15, 2019 Translation by skilled teachers and paraprofessionals. Translation by skilled teachers and paraprofessionals translation by skilled teachers and paraprofessionals 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency, skilled teachers and paraprofessionals whom speak another language will communicate to limited-English proficient families. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. During Monday Professional Development sessions, staff members have been trained and are aware of the use of the translation services and the over-the-phone interpretation services to communicate with a limited proficient parent. They have been provided with the over-the-phone number, and the procedure and instructions. The staff has obtained copies of and reviewed Language Line's Helpful Tips for working with an Over-the-Phone Interpreter to make the most of their exchange with a limited-English-proficient parent. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Upon a new student's enrollment, the parent language will be written on the student's Blue Emergency Contact Card, and maintained on the ATS System through the ELPC program, which must updated within the 10 days of the student's arrival. Parent's needs for oral and written translations will be reviewed, and the teachers and a paraprofessional will be available to fulfill Section VII of Chancellor's Regulations A-663, during workshops, meetings, and for parental notices, and documents, along with the Board of Education translation services. A written notification of parent's rights regarding translation and interpretation in the appropriate covered languages, and on how to obtain these services will be posted in the school, and distributed to the parents. All notification documents can be found at the T & I intranet site. Through Professional Development workshops, staff members have been trained and are aware of how to use translation services and the over-the-phone interpretation services. At that time the over-the-phone interpreter access phone number was given, and procedures were explained to teachers. Also, reviewed and distributed were the 0  Language Line's 11 Helpful Tips for Working with an Over-the-Phone Interpreter for staff to make the most of their exchange with a limited-English-proficient parent. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The school will gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services by administering parent surveys, and during weekly parent outreach and contact meetings. 1 
