 School Name: 22K109 P.S. 109 Principal: KERDY BERTRAND   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: PS/IS 109 332200010109 PK, K, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 1001 East 45 th Street 718-693-3426 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 22K109 718-693-3072 Fax: KerdyBertrand kbertra@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Email Address: KerdyBertrand Martha Murray NgosiGeorge ClaudiaJohn Alethea Barton RashardWilliams(NewYorkEdge),ArielZitrin(GlobalKids) CBO Representative: Geographical District: 22 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Julia Bove Superintendent: 5619 Flatlands Avenue jbove@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-968-6116 Phone Number: 718-693-3072 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Brooklyn South Mauriciere De Govia FSC: Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 415 89th St., Brooklyn, 11209 mdegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-759-4862 Phone Number: 718-759-4862 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) KerdyBertrand Martha Murray NgosiGeorge AletheaBarton N/A N/A *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) RashardWilliams, ArielZitrin CBO Representative, if applicable Claudia John ShannonMurphy Kathleen O'Neill Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Alethea Barton SusanPhillips Leslie Angus DeborahWilliams N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview The mission of P.S. /I. S. 109 is to establish an educational environment that meets the needs of the whole child. Our aim is to produce lifelong learners and thinkers by providing standards-driven instruction in all curriculum areas. We seek a collaborative environment where parents, teachers, and children are active participants in the total learning process. We believe that every child can be successful if we: (a) provide a safe harbor for learning, (b) prepare   students to be college/career-ready, and (c) build on their strengths while simultaneously, developing areas that pose challenges. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS/IS 109, the Glenwood Academy for Science and Technology is a Pre-Kindergarten through 8th Grade school located in the East Flatbush section of Brooklyn. The school population is 81% Black, 17 % Hispanic, 1% White and 1% Asian. The student body is comprised of 5% English as New Language (ENL) students, and 30% Special Education students. We have a CBO partnership with Global Kids, an organization that prepares our middle school students to be advocates and better citizens. Global Kids programs such as-- Power of Citizenry, Green Team, and Peacekeepers, are designed to incorporate key ingredients such as International affairs and global education; 21st Century skill building including problem-solving, critical thinking, digital literacy, cross-cultural communication; and hands-on leadership opportunities through youth led peer education, social action campaigns, service learning projects, digital media production, and internships. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our ENL students are tasked with learning academic content, while also acquiring proficiency in the English language. They participate in an after school program to provide enrichment opportunities to acquire proficiency in the language. They also participate in activities that promote and develop reading, writing, listening and speaking skills, an evidenced need of this sub-group based on the most recent NYSESLAT data There is a self-contained class on every grade level and we have opened more ICT classes to meet the needs of our students with individualized educational plans. Both of our subgroups are in need of standard based instruction that incorporates multiple points of entry in order for them to improve learning. In math, our special student populations struggle with operations and algebraic thinking especially in solving word problems and pulling relevant textual evidence to support their claims and point of view. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Over the past year the school has made the most progress in the area of Rigorous Instruction, moving from a 2.15 metric to 2.33, years 2016-17 and 2017-18, respectively. (School Quality Guide, 2017 and School Quality Guide 2018). Another area the school has seen noted improvement is in area 5c: Collaborative Teachers. The most recent (March, 2018) PPO visit confirmed that staff time is structured for teams to meet regularly and effectively. Teacher teams are working more effectively than in previous years because of this time to meet. It has resulted in increased collaboration between some teams, and the opportunity to collaboratively create unit plans (1.3; 4.2). Although the 2017 School Performance Dashboard indicates student achievement as the strongest performing element of the Framework, the school will continue to focus on consistently providing student-centered, rigorous instruction aligned with standards-based learning activities to continue that trend. Teachers will incorporate multiple points of entry so that all learners can be fully engaged in their work in all subject areas. Teachers will collaborate to create quality, authentic assessments that are tracked for student progress. The key area of focus school year 2018-19 is to promote more effective forms of assessment across all grades and subjects, that can be used to drive instruction across classes, grades, and track trends in the school. The March 2018 PPO indicates that formative data is not used to drive instruction in real time, and that teachers have not begun to use hard data to drive instruction. 0  1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 22K109 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 681 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 101 99 11 7 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 39 41 9 8 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 86.0% % Attendance Rate 80.9% % Reduced Lunch 6.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.0% 14.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.09 2% 6% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 37.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 58% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 39 38 91.7% 4.6% 24.2% 80.0% 1.8% 1.3% 4 14% 8.9 26.9% 46% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Students scores on 2017 State exams in ELA and Math increased, 7% and 8% respectively, as a result of focusing on standards-based instruction. According to the 2017-18 School Quality Guide, scores increased in 80% of the Rigorous Instruction sub-categories over the past year. 2. New York State ELA and Math data shows an increase of students scoring at levels 3 and 4 (16%, 27%, 33%) and (8%, 15%, 24%), for the years 2015, 2016, 2017 for ELA and Math, respectively. Although, this is promising data overall, all groups are not experiencing the same gains at the same rate. The most recent Quality Review (October 2016) reflected that teaching strategies inconsistently provided multiple entry points into the curricula, and that not all students are engaged in appropriately challenging tasks that allow them to demonstrate their thinking. The impact of that is an uneven engagement in challenging tasks and uneven demonstration of higher-order thinking skills in student work products, including the work of ENLs and special education students. Not all student writing and discussion reflected high levels of rigor. College and career readiness skills are not evenly evident across grades. Planning for instructional coherence is inconsistent for all students with disabilities and ENL students. The 2017-18 School Quality Guide shows that only 54% of students responded that they are challenged in most of their classes. The priority need is improve the performance of all our students, including our students with special needs and English Language Learners. In order to do that, we will need to monitor student progress for each child throughout the year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 3% increase of students in grades 6-8 meeting or exceeding grade level proficiency in literacy as assessed and demonstrated by their Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) levels. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Teachers will administer DRPs at least three times a year for each student and set actionable learning goals for students, based on those assessments  Teachers will submit assessment reports/goals to supervisors. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Grade 5-8 students Sept 2018-May 2019 Teachers/Assistant Principals  Teacher teams on each grade will have regular meetings Students to align curricula with the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) and the NYC Scope and Sequence for Science and Social Studies, and implement NYC Passport for Social Studies, and other Common-core aligned units of study.  Teachers will use rubrics and anchor papers to analyze student work and share best practices and strategies. o Teachers will incorporate the use of technology into their lessons to engage students in their learning.  Teachers will incorporate multiple points of entry to Students meet the needs of each student, including students with special needs and English Language Learners, and at-risk differentiation services.  Targeted instruction for identified groups in the classroom. Sept 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Middle School Quality Initiative (MSQI) Literacy Coach Sept 2018- June 2019 Teachers, Service Providers, PPT, Administration  An Extended School Day/Saturday Program to provide additional instructional time for targeted small groups At-Risk Students, ENL students Nov 2018- May 2019 Teachers, Service Providers, Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent classroom orientations for every grade (PreK-8), hosted by classroom teachers, will be conducted in September 2018 to inform parents of expectations and curriculum. In addition to Parent-Teacher conferences, 4  progress report meetings are held throughout the year, especially for at-risk students. These meetings will be held by the Guidance department and Administration. Translations are provided, as necessary. There will also be interactive family workshops, Parent Coordinator Meetings, Breakfast with Principal updates, email and messenger blasts, Remind App, Class Dojo and Engrade will be the main conduits to sharing information with families. Admininstration, PTA and teachers will collaborate to ensure that during the monthly meetings parents are continuously informed of activities and events. Monthly newsletters will inform parents about important instructional information and school events. including those that will support their understanding of what their child is learning in school. Quarterly progress reports are sent to all parents. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers, DRP Assessments, Technology Equipment/Upgrades, Software, SmartBoards, Per Session for Extended School Day/Saturday School Program, Per Diem time for MOSL work, as needed, Reading/Test Preparation books, schedule adjustments for Common Planning/Grade Meeting times, professional development, common core aligned materials (e.g. EngageNY, NY Ready, Triumph Learning/Coach Math and ELA materials, Mathletics Software, Go Math, Code-X, Fundations and Journeys ELA program). Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. At least 15% of students in grades 5-8 will meet or exceed grade level proficiency in literacy as assessed and demonstrated by their Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) levels. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) DRP Reading Assessments will be conducted and entered into Excel/SPSS (statistics software) so we can view/analyze the percentage of students who have met or exceeded grade level proficiency in literacy. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1. Students feel welcome and safe inside of school, because of support staff that are readily available to support students' emotional needs. The school has established a positive learning community through behavior intervention systems such as quarterly award ceremonies recognizing achievement and improvement. PBIS initiatives have been put in place; students are rewarded with school trips/activities acknowledging positive behaviors. The Principal Performance Observation (October 2017) concluded that the PBIS program will fit nicely with the recently formed Student Government. Another area of celebration noted was parental involvement through school functions and activities such as the monthly "Waffle Wednesday", where parents are invited to the school to receive information on relevant topics. 2. The 2017-18 School Quality Guide shows that only 43% of students and teachers responded positively to Classroom Behavior questions. The same data source reveals that only 55% of students felt that discipline was applied fairly in the school. Based on this, the priority needs will be regarding classroom behavior and discipline, both inside and outside of classrooms in the school. 3. The school follows a progressive approach to discipline, which includes guidance support and interventions to address the underlying issue(s) causing discipline issues. Mental Health workshops were offered during the 17-18 academic year, and will be continued in the 18-19 year to teach students coping strategies and ensure school personnel are aware of risk factors/signs to look for in students. Conflict resolution/ peer mediation is available through guidance and/or the school dean. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, student leaders will help to develop a series of recognition events to increase student engagement and PBIS expectations will be communicated clearly to students/families, resulting in 3% increase in students positively responding to School Survey questions regarding behavior/discipline. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Class Elections for Student Leaders, including ENL and SWD classes. Students September Teachers/Administration Monthly meetings between School Leaders and Administration to plan PBIS incentives/events and discuss issues concerning the student body PBIS Assembly to discuss classroom/school behavior expectations and how they relate to PBIS events/incentives Quarterly Student Recognition/Awards Assembly to recognize students for academic excellence, academic improvement, and embodiment of the character/behavior goals of the P.R.I.D.E (Politeness, Responsibility, Independence, Diligence, Empathy ) school motto. 2018 Students Oct 2018- May 2019 Students Sept 2018 Jan 2019 Students Nov 2018 Principal, Assistant Principals Dean, Guidance Counselor, Administration Guidance counselors, Dean, Administration Jan 2019 April 2019 June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The September Family Engagement Open-School will have workshops dedicated to informing parents about how PBIS will work for the school year and topics which should be discussed with their children so they can be supported at home as well. Waffle Wednesdays are offered on a monthly basis, covering topics/issues that may affect students and their families. Parent workshops and multiple sources of information via emails, messenger blasts, fliers and parental contact will inform parents of upcoming events. Workshops will be provided quarterly and/or at Parent Engagement events. A monthly newsletter will be sent home by each grade, and a monthly newsletter by the Parent Coordinator. The Parent Coordinator, guidance team, classroom teachers and administration will disseminate communication with parents to help understand what areas the school is focusing on to improve Social/Emotional Learning and awareness. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 7   2 periods of Social Studies per month dedicated to value education,  Character.com resources,   Conflict resolution workshops for the Conflict Resolution Team.  Monthly meetings with the student body government and administration to support student needs, while Six Pillars of Character videos,  giving student choice for ideas and direction for the next month's PBIS/school spirit events. Student recognition announcements, Sanford Harmony Community Building activities, No Place For Hate workshops and student activities Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, at least 45% of students will respond positively to questions about Classroom Behavior in a mock Student survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School-created mock student survey that mirrors the questions/choices in the School Quality Guide Student Survey. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. The 2017-18 School Quality Guide indicates that Cultural Awareness and and Inclusive Classroom Instruction as a school strength, based on 89% of students and teachers responding positively to that question on the School Survey (2018). 2. The most recent Quality Review (October 2016), rated Teacher Teams and Leadership Development as "developing." The priority need revealed by this data source is for teachers to further develop collaboration on teams and use an inquiry approach to analyze aggregated data across grades. Teacher teams must use common meeting times to work on and plan interdisciplinary units, strategies for individual and groups of students and performance tasks aligned with those units to adequately measure student growth. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 teachers will promote more effective forms of assessment by collaborating to create 3 authentic and rigorous common assessments, aligned to CCLS for each core subject/grade. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Teachers will create and administer a common grade assessment to be used as a diagnostic, a benchmark, and a summative for students in each grade/core subject. Teachers will be provided with discipline-specific professional development to effectively implement teaching strategies that allow all students, including ENL and SWD, to engage in activities, tasks and lessons that are aligned to the CCLS. Teachers will develop lessons that focus on students’ understanding, incorporating UDL strategies, specially-designed instruction (SDI) and Webb’s DOK to raise the rigor of classroom instruction. Common planning time will continue be provided for teachers to plan and implement tasks with clear assessment criteria in all subjects, and use protocols to analyze student work in a data-inquiry cycle in vertical and grade teams. Teachers/Administration  All students  Sept'18, Jan 2019, May 2019 Teachers Sept 2018 –May 2019 Teachers/Administration Teachers Sept 2018 – May 2019 (bi-weekly) Teachers/Administration  Providing at-risk intervention and Teachers Nov 2018- Teachers/Administration differentiation services for identified students  Targeted instruction for identified groups of students in an Extended School Day/Saturday School program to provide additional instructional time for targeted small groups May 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 0  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent classroom orientations for every grade (PreK-8), hosted by classroom teachers, will be conducted in September 2018 to inform parents of expectations and forms of assessment. In addition to Parent-Teacher conferences, progress report meetings are held throughout the year, especially for at-risk students. These meetings will be held by the Guidance department and Administration. Translations are provided, as necessary. There will also be interactive family workshops, Parent Coordinator Meetings, Breakfast with Principal updates, email and messenger blasts, Remind App, Class Dojo and Engrade will be the main conduits to sharing information with families. Admininstration, PTA and teachers will collaborate to ensure that during the monthly meetings parents are continuously informed of activities and events. Monthly newsletters will inform parents about important assessment information and school events. including those that will support their understanding of what their child is learning in school. Quarterly progress reports and results of assessments will be sent to all parents. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Grade level and content area teams will meet weekly during the school day. Vertically paired teams will meet during the Monday Professional Learning times. Instructional resources include: Assessments, Technology Equipment/Upgrades, Software, SmartBoards, Per Session for Extended School Day/Saturday School Program, Per Diem time for MOSL work, as needed, Reading/Test Preparation books, schedule adjustments for Common Planning/Grade Meeting times, professional development, common core aligned materials (e.g. EngageNY, NY Ready, Triumph Learning/Coach Math and ELA materials, Mathletics Software, Go Math, Code-X, Fundations and Journeys ELA program). Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, teachers in each grade will have created both a diagnostic assessment, and a benchmark assessment for each of the core subjects. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher-created common assessments in each grade/core subject. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. According to 2017-18 Advance data, 61% of all teachers Increased , 18% had no change, 8% decreased in component 3d.. Also shown in the same data source: 11 teachers were rated Ineffective / Developing in 2016/17 - 100% increased of those teachers increased; the average gain was .55%. 7 teachers were rated developing in 2016/17 - 6 increased (86%); the average gain was .39%. 2. Effective School Leadership was identified as an area of growth by the most recent Quality Review (Oct 2016). Indicators 3.1 and 4.1, under Systems for improvement were both rated "developing". The priority need to be addressed in this goal as a result is to establish a coherent vision of school improvement reflected in a short list of focused, data-based goals that are tracked for progress and are understood and supported by the entire school community. To accomplish this, school leaders will need to observe teachers using the Danielson Framework for Teaching along with the analysis of learning outcomes to elevate school-wide instructional practices and implement strategies that promote professional growth and reflection. School leaders need to leverage the positive impact of inclusion to facilitate professional learning for staff to improve student outcomes. The observation cycle needs to include time-line for observations with adequate time in between to meet, co-plan and model expectations for teachers, and coaching in between those observations. There is a need to ensure that teachers are given verbal feedback within 48hrs and the written observation within 21 days, with actionable feedback that will support student progress and lead to improved pedagogy as measured by Danielson Framework for Teaching Domain 3d – assessment. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teacher capacity to use assessment in instruction aligned with Danielson component, 3d, resulting in a 5% increase in teachers improving at least one proficiency level as measured by Advance, as a result of the teacher observation/feedback cycle and coaching/professional development provided by school administration. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  During the Initial Planning Conference, administrators will set goals with teachers, specific to component 3d. Professional Development will be planned based on the data from teachers’ annual goals, including making the curriculum accessible for ENL students and students with special needs. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Sept 2018- Administration Oct 2018 Administration will conduct learning walks as a team to norm/calibrate observations/ratings via the observation rubric. Teachers Sept 2018-Oct 2019 Administration Administration Teachers Oct 2018- Administration June 2019 Teachers Oct 2018- Administration Administrators June 2019 Administrators will debrief on the progress of teachers to monitor progress toward the goal. A schedule of observations will be established that includes time for supporting teachers in their goals for improvement. Regular feedback conferences with teachers will discuss the instructional growth of students groups, notably ENL and SWD groups. Administrators will model instructional "best practices", assign teachers to differentiated Professional Learning Communities during Mon PD time, and schedule inter-visitations for teachers to see other classrooms in the building, and in other schools to observe best practices in component 3d.  Administrators will use weekly cabinet meetings to discuss/analyze Advance data to monitor progress toward the goal, discuss observations, and modify PD as necessary. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will share assessment data with parents, facilitating the process of support their children at home. The school will host interactive workshops, Parent Coordinator meetings, and Waffle Wednesdays to invite parents to learn about the Assessment cycle. The school will share information with parents through newsletters, monthly 3  calendars sent home by the Parent Coordinator, email and messenger blasts, the Remind App, Class Dojo, and Engrade. Parents will be part of shared leadership in decisions through the SLT and the PTA. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Cabinet meeting time, Monday PL time, MSQI Partnership, Teacher per session, Per diem, Web-based assessment programs (STAR 360), Funding for PL consultants from outside organizations to provide professional development throughout the year, master schedule programming to allow for common time for teachers to meet during the school day, funding for curricular materials (equipment, software, textbooks, etc.) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA C4E 21st Century Grant SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, at least 2.5% of teachers will have improved one performance indicator in Domain 3d, as shown by Advance data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Parent survey responses have increased in the last three years along with attendance at school functions such as Bi-monthly Principal Breakfast, Meet the Teacher Night and Parent Teacher Conferences. 86% of responses to Strong Family-Community Ties were positive (2017 School Quality Guide). 2. Attendance at Parent’s Association Meetings, while never robust, begins to drop as the year progresses. Although our parent coordinator surveys the school community to determine topics of interest for workshops throughout the school year, attendance is limited. As a result, only 53% of parents indicate that they have been asked to volunteer time to support their school or spend time in the classroom (School Quality Guide 2017). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the collaborative partnership with families and community organizations will continue to be strengthened through effective outreach efforts, as measured by a 2% increase of families saying that they have had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school (Q4a) on the School Survey. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Three (3) Interactive Common-Core Parent workshops in the evening. Parents/ Families Sep '18  Three (3) Parents as Learning Partners classroom visits during the day.  Workshops will include strategies to address the needs of ELLs and SWD. Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Administration Oct '18 Nov'18 Dec '18 Feb '19 Mar '19 Parents will be invited into Classroom Publishing Parties to view the work their children are creating and see their child's progress, including ENL classes and ICT/ self-contained classes. Distribution of monthly calendars in a timely fashion, with the dates of workshops, school events, instructional goals, etc. Invite parents to volunteer time with school functions such as: Family Fun Nights, Art Expo, Science Fair, School Carnival, Multi-Cultural Night, Parent as Learning Partner days, Parent Coordinator workshops, and Parent’s Association meetings, etc. Parents/Families Oct '18-Jun '19 (monthly) Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Administration Parents/Families Sept '18- June '19 Parent Coordinator/Administration Parents/Families Sept '18- Parent Coordinator/Administration June '19 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. NY EDGE (formerly SASF), Global Kids, East Flatbush Village, Flatlands Flatbush Civic Group Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 6  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher/Supervisor per session, advertising, refreshments during workshops, technology, extended-use of building time, etc. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will have been at least 5 calendars and/or newsletters sent home to families with opportunities to volunteer time at class/school events clearly indicated, resulting in a 1% increase of parents/families indicated they have had opportunity to volunteer on the mock survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School-created survey mirroring Parent Involvement section of School Quality Guide. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Fountas and Pinnell Intervention System for students in grades K-8; Ready New York CCLS; SPIRES,which is a phonics program which builds a foundation for reading and writing. The instruction provides an explicit, cumulative and multisensory approach with the targeted populations. Ready New York CCLS; Scaffolding, small group reteach, manipulatives Re-teaching, modeling, demonstration, scaffolding Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students identified as part of the lowest 1/3; Students who have received a Level 1 on the NYS ELA exam; Fountas and Pinnell assessment for all grades, students referred to PPT Students identified as part of the lowest 1/3; Students who have received a Level 1 on the NYS Math exam, students referred to PPT Students who have not demonstrated proficiency as evidenced by teacher qualitative and quantitative data (utilizing the Next Generation Science Standards) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group, One to one, and tutoring During the school day, Saturday Small group, One to one, and tutoring During the school day, during Saturday Small group During the school day 8 Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students who have not demonstrated proficiency. As measured by teacher qualitative and quantitative data (utilizing the New York State k-12 Social Studies Framework) IEPs, referrals to the PPT Content reading and writing incorporated into ELA curriculum Small group During school day Group or individual sessions During the school day Peer mediation student, conflict resolution, counselling sessions, assembly programs 9  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 132 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We provide school uniforms, school supplies, and other resources to our STH population. Additionally, we provide academic intervention services to the STH population that would most benefit from additional supports. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 0  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 1  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. At present, all of our teachers are highly qualified according to the NYS BEDS Survey. Prospective teachers go through a rigorous interview process. All possess the required licenses for their particular assignments. Once a teacher is hired they receive in-house professional development on specific pedagogical practices employed at 109 from our veteran/mentor teachers. All new teachers are assigned a mentor in their specific discipline/license area for the required one year period. We currently recruit teachers who hold multiple certifications across grades and content areas. Our teachers participate in various school committees. They are involved in professional learning groups to share best practices to develop and improve their pedagogical practices and improve student outcomes. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Monday afternoons from 2:20PM to 3:40PM is dedicated to collaborative learning where “teachers are teaching teachers”. Teachers lead professional development sessions on topics of interest based on a needs assessment done in September. Additionally, our “Go To” teachers and administrators attend periodic workshops and then turn-key information and/or practices to other staff members. All staff is encouraged to attend outside professional development sessions and read professional articles in order to develop topics for future professional development sessions. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 2  Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Incoming Kindergarten students and their parents are invited to attend a workshop to familiarize them with the instructional programs, support services, policies and procedures for our school in June of each year. For those students who require ENL screening: parents are invited to an orientation workshop to explain the models of instruction so they can make an informed choice for their children. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers are part of the MOSL Selection and Assessment team will determine the common assessments used for each grade level. An evaluation of data from i-Ready, end of unit performance based assessments from Journeys and Code-X, along with results of NYS assessments, is done by classroom teachers and is used to inform decisions for the formation of small groups, RTI groups and Early Morning and After School programs. Additionally, students in Kindergarten, first and second grades are administered the Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment to determine a student’s reading level. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) 3  Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 491,008.00 Title II, Part A Federal 81,337.00 Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal 12,367.00 0 Tax Levy (FSF) Local 4,111,143.00 x x x x Section 5A Part 3a, 4a, 4b Section 5B Part 3a, 4a, 4b Section 5C Part 4a, 4a, 4b Section 5A Part 3a, 4a, 4b Section 5B Part 3a, 4a, 4b Section 5C Part 4a, 4a, 4b Section 5A Part 3a, 4a, 4b Section 5B Part 3a, 4a, 4b Section 5C Part 4a, 4a, 4b Section 5A Part 3a, 4a, 4b Section 5B Part 3a, 4a, 4b Section 5C Part 4a, 4a, 4b 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual 4  identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 5  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S 109, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS/IS 109 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 6  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community. Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); 7  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help. The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS/IS 109, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; 8  ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year. Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; 9  ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences. Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs. II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; 0  ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 1 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 3 9 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 5 11 12 2  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: RATIONALE Through a supplementary after-school program provided by Title III funding, 32 English Language Learners in grades 3-8 will be offered small group instruction in the areas of English Language Arts (ELA) and English as a New Language (ENL) . The 32 students are in the testing grades, 3 - 8. The program will assist students by providing them with the instructional support they need in the areas of listening, speaking, reading, and writing. Our rationale for the program is formulated by student need according to data available for our English language learners. According to the 2018 NYSESLAT results, running records, and teacher assessments, all data shows that our students are in need of supplemental academic support services in these content areas. It is our rationale that this support would be best delivered in small groups. In lowering the student to teacher ratio, it is our belief that our English Language Learners will be given opportunities to optimize their learning. English language learners in grades 3-8 will be invited to participate in our Title III After-school supplementary support program. The students will be grouped and taught according to individual needs as per overall student data results. All groups will be taught in English with native language supports. Two New York State licensed ENL pedagogues will conduct classes that support English Language Learners as they master skills necessary for meeting and exceeding the standards for ELA and NYSESLAT. Our supplementary program will be offered on Wednesdays and Thursdays after school from 2:30 to 4:30. It will begin in November 2018 and end in March 2019. SUBGROUPS & GRADE LEVELS TO BE SERVED: Our after school ELA supplementary support program will consist of two groups divided by grades 3-5 and 6-8. SCHEDULE & DURATION: This “Title III ELL After-School Academy,” will be offered on Wednesdays and Thursdays after school from 2:30 p.m to 4:30 p.m. It will begin in November and end in March, for approximately 20 weeks of instruction. The rationale for this academy is to provide additional support in listening, reading and writing skills for our first-time ELL ELA test-takers and to provide supplemental support for our Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, and Expanding ELLs to help them increase by at least one level on this exam. As per the New York State Education Department regulations, ELLs who have been in the English Language School System for more than a year and a day must take the ELA exam. First time test takers need to learn strategies that will help to familiarize them with format of this exam while also maximizing their potential success rate. All English Language Learners across grades 3 through 8 will be offered the Title III after school program. This academy will serve 32 ELLs and will consist of two groups divided by grades 3-5 and 6-8. 3  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information LANGUAGE OF INSTRUCTION: The language of instruction will be in English with native language supports. NUMBER AND TYPE OF CERTIFIED TEACHERS: There will be two certified ENL teachers, Ms. G. Everett and Ms. R. Henry. TYPES OF MATERIALS: We will use Becoming a Better Reader: Comprehending Strategies for the New Standards, published by Rally Education. rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: P.S. / I.S 109 will provide a high quality professional development that is of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers' performance in the classrooms. The professional development will be well-planned and ongoing. Some of the topics to be covered are: 1. Differentiation in Instruction 2. Planning for ELL Instruction in the Classroom, Day 1 and Day 2 3. Explicit and Implicit Instruction (aligning instruction to the standards) The rationale for each of these delineated topics, and additional topics to be later identified, is (a) the classroom teachers need to help the ELLs develop the competence in English necessary for achieving the outcomes of the key learning areas, (b) the classroom teachers need to develop and implement teaching strategies and practices that address the English Language and literacy learning needs of the ELLs, and (c) the teaching staff's need to create an environment where ELLs' language learning will benefit from scaffolding supports and high expectations by their teachers. Copies of sign-in sheets and agendas for each event will be kept for monitoring and auditing purposes. For the 2018 - 2019 school year, the Title III budget allocation is $12,366.00, which will be utilized in the following manner: · · Professional&nbsp;development&nbsp;for&nbsp;Title&nbsp;III&nbsp;parents&nbsp;(10%) · · and&nbsp;student&nbsp;engagement&nbsp;and&nbsp;other&nbsp;activities&nbsp;(20%)&nbsp; At the allocated cost to the Title III Program, our ENL teachers will be provided with resources as well as receive training from the Department of English Language Learners and Student Support (DELLSS). They will then work collaboratively and turn-key this information in a series of Professional Learning Opportunities to our teaching staff. Additionally, our teaching staff will be After-school&nbsp;program&nbsp;(60%) Professional&nbsp;development&nbsp;for&nbsp;teachers&nbsp;(10%) Parent 4  Part C: Professional Development trained in ENL strategies as they work collaboratively with ENL licensed teachers in their classrooms through the Integrated Teaching model. The ENL methods to be utilized are, but not limited to: - Advanced Literacy techniques - Total Physical Response Methodology - CALLA Approach - Differentiated Instruction - RTI strategies for the ELLs and all students who need the support. Three hours of after school planning time per month will be used to plan and formulate professional learning workshops for teachers from November through June. At no cost to the Title III program, ELL Professional Learning for general education teachers, content area teachers, and special education teachers will then take place during the professional learning time allotted on Mondays. Additionally, at no cost to the Title III program, our ELL teachers, content area and special education teachers will be sent periodically to the Department of English Language Learner Student Support for learning opportunities that become available. They will then turn-key this training to our staff members. rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: It is our belief that forging a strong partnership between school and home is vital to nurturing the academic and social growth of students. Strong parental involvement is one factor that research has shown time and time again to have positive effects on academic achievement and the overall culture of the school. Parental involvement supports, encourages, and provides opportunities for parents and educators to work together on behalf of our students. Maintaining such a relationship is of utmost importance at P.S/I.S. 109. In addition to our mandated activities, such as parent orientation during the ELL identification process, we plan to implement a series of Parent Engagement workshops targeted towards the parents of our English Language Learners. It is our hope that these activities will impact higher achievement for our English Language Learners. The topics to be covered within our Parent Workshops are: - Understanding Student Data - discussing NYSESLAT levels, November 2018 - A literacy workshop entitled The Family That Reads Together, Succeeds Together, January 2019 - Parent Workshop-Intergrating the New Generation Standards as it pertains to ELL instruction, March 2019 The dates of the workshops will coincide with the school Common Core parent workshops to maximize parent attendance. Refreshments will be served. Our licensed ENL teachers will conduct the workshops. Some materials to be used at these workshops are available on the Department of Education Website (data, ELA test materials, NYSESLAT practice exams) and there will be no cost to the program. Additional resources for the parents will be purchased with Title III funds. The translation of materials for these workshops will come from the Department of Education Translation Unit at no cost to the Title III program. Copies of 5 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities sign-in sheets and agendas for each event will be available for monitoring and auditing purposes. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 6  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 22 School Name Glenwood Academy of Science & Technology Borough Brooklyn School Number 109 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Kerdy Bertrand Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Gilda Everett/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Rosemarie Henry Spanish/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Linda Parnes/Librarian Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Julianna Bove Assistant Principal Marina Brown Coach type here School Counselor Joanne Manganelli Parent Leslie-Ann Angus Parent Coordinator Laurentina Matthew Field Support Center Staff Member Natalie Hemmings Noble Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 7  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 646 Total number of ELLs 53 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 8.20% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 K 0 0 0 00 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 00 0 0 0 0 0 00 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 00 0 0 8 0 00 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 00 00 0 00 0 10 11 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 12 0 0 0 0 00 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? PS/IS 109 uses Fountas and Pinnell, Fundations, Code X, and Journeys unit assessments (pre and post tests), to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs. The data enables us to attain specific details on the strengths and weaknesses of each student in terms of reading fluency, alphabet and sight word recognition, comprehension, and phonemic awareness. In addition, the data is used to provide differentiated instruction for our ELLs. NYSESLAT and NYSITELL scores are also taken into consideration, since they assess the early literacy skills in reading and writing for our ELL population. The data patterns reveal that our students achieved the highest scores on the Speaking and Listening portions of the NYSESLAT, and the lowest scores on the Reading and Writing parts of the NYSESLAT. This data informs our school's instructional plan because it is used to determine which students will need AIS, placement in classes, how the Tier 1 RtI instruction is to be delivered, and whether Tier 2 and Tier 3 RtI interventions are necessary. 8  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Teachers have weekly common planning time built into their schedules to allow for teachers to plan, design and grade the assessments. They will then analyze the students' work to determine the necessary adjustments needed to support the ELL students. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our programs for ELLs by using data from teacher-made assessments, unit tests in our ELA and math programs, NYS ELA and Math, and NYSESLAT exams to measure the progress of our students. We use the data to assess the growth and progress of our students, and where we see a need for improvement, we adjust our instruction and programs accordingly. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? ELL teachers have weekly common planning time built into their schedules and also meet during PL Mondays to plan interventions that need to take place for ELL students. They will then analyze the students' work to determine the necessary adjustments needed to support the ELL students. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The general education classroom teachers use ELA test results, teacher-made tests, running records, and curriculum unit tests to group students according to ability. The ELLs participate in the rigorous Tier 1 instruction provided by the teacher in the classroom setting. The classroom teachers are in constant communication with the ENL teacher to collaborate on language development, meaningful lessons, teaching higher order, complex thinking, and extensive use of dialogue in the classroom. Our use of the stand-alone ENL instruction with the ENL teacher serves as the Tier II component for the ELLs. The ELLs receive extra, individualized attention that is targeted to meet their specific needs. This is implemented in addition to the Tier I core instruction. The ENL teacher has specific assessments for the ELLs, in addition to using NYSESLAT and NYSITELL results for information on the reading, writing, listening, and speaking skills of the students. Throughout the school year, quizzes, writing samples, and running records are used to monitor student progress. NYSAA students are given alternative assessments tailored to their abilities. For Tier III instruction, our AIS and SETTs teachers provide intensive intervention in small groups. These sessions provide skills-based activities in decoding, reading comprehension, vocabulary, sight word recognition, and organization and coherence in writing. Students are also encouraged to participate in conversation to improve speaking skills. The speech providers also work on processing skills for the students. All of these strategies are utilized to ensure that our ELLs receive a rigorous, appropriate education. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data patterns reveal that our students achieved the highest scores on the Speaking and Listening portions of the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL, and the lowest scores on the Reading and Writing portions of the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Teachers of ELL students will meet in September to disseminate the data and analyze it for next steps in creating a plan to address the weaknesses that are inherent in the teaching and learning programs. Part IV: ELL Programming 9  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. a. Our organizational model is stand-alone and integrated instruction as per State guidelines. We have two certified ENL teachers for grades K - 8. The full-time licensed ENL teachers collaborate with content area and classroom teachers to drive instruction in the ENL classroom. The groups are composed of single grades or 2 contiguous grades, focusing on Common Core aligned lessons that address listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? In providing English Language Learners with licensed ENL teachers for the mandated number of instructional minutes of ENL, we schedule two-period blocks of ENL instruction at a time, when possible, in order to ensure that we meet or exceed the mandated 360 minutes of teaching for our Entering and Emerging students and 180 minutes for our students at the Transitioning and Advanced level. Students at the Commanding level receive their 90 minutes of integrated ENL instruction during their ELA periods, when possible. Most of our integrated ENL instruction is scheduled during ELA periods to ensure that that students obtain their ELA and ENL instructional mandates. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Throughout all the content areas; Science, Math, Social Studies and ELA/ENL, the instructional approaches used are: modified balanced literacy, scaffolding, extensive use of visuals, gestures, audio-visual materials, graphic organizers, hands-on materials and computer technology. All of these materials and approaches provide content area support for ELLs. For content area native language support, the students have access to bilingual dictionaries and content area bilingual glossaries. These methods are in alignment with the CCLS to "Interpret words and phrases as hey are used in a text, including determining technical, connotative, and figurative meanings, and analyze how specific word choices shape meaning or tone (Common Core Anchor Standard)". The ENL teacher uses these materials in her instruction. The materials used are aligned with New York State and City ENL standards and the Common Core Curriculum. In our varied approaches and methods, subject area content is made comprehensible to enrich language development. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? This is not applicable to PS/IS 109. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 0  a. The school’s policy for SIFE is to inform their parents and all ENL and non-ENL teachers and create an individualized student plan based on the input of all teachers. Our instructional plan for grades 3 - 8 SIFE is to provide them with supplemental literacy support by utilizing the RIGOR program. RIGOR is a program that consists of leveled Science and Social Studies content-area non-fiction books that teach phonemic awareness, comprehension, and decoding skills. SIFE students will be offered every possible opportunity for assistance, including but not limited to Title III programs, AIS programs, and extended-day instruction. b. Our plan for newcomers (less than three years) is to provide pull-out instruction tailored to their needs, focusing on vocabulary instruction, reading, and speaking skills. We will also provide a Title III morning program which will focus on reading and writing in light of the fact that they are subject to the NCLB regulation stipulating that newcomers are required to take the NYS ELA after one year and one day of being admitted in an English Language School System (ELSS). We will teach using ENL methodologies and appropriate, Common Core aligned ENL and ELA materials. c. All of our programs are available to our ELLs who have been receiving 4-6 years of service. The elementary students use the higher level components of the RIGOR series with additional authentic science and social studies texts in order to enrich the program. Reach and Inside, both National Geographic literacy programs, are used for middle school students. It utilizes non-fiction reading passages to teach reading comprehension and writing skills. According to NYSESLAT results, writing is the area that needs the most growth, so we will offer a Title III program that addresses essay writing skills. We also use Common Core aligned materials for test preparation in our Title III after-school program. d. All of the programs described in section C are available to our long-term ELLs (6+ years of service). We will look at the NYSESLAT data to determine the modality that needs the most improvement for each long-term ELL and then tailor the instruction accordingly, working with the classroom or content-area teacher to provide appropriate instruction during push-in sessions. e. For two years, former ELLs will receive testing modifications for all assessments and State exams. They will remain in heterogeneous classes with current ELLs, so they will continue to receive the benefit of ENL methodology throughout instruction during push-in sessions. This September, former ELLs will receive 90 minutes of ENL instruction per week in order to assist them in the transition from ELL to former ELL. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Licensed and trained Special Education teachers work with our licensed and trained ENL teachers to deliver instruction to all ELL-SWDs using a wide variety of instructional strategies as well as grade level materials. Special Education students who are identified as ELLs as per the State requirements (NYSITELL) are placed in the appropriate Special Education classrooms and are pulled out by a certified ENL teacher for their mandated time of ENL instruction. Entering and Emerging students they will receive 360 minutes of ENL per week- 180 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA, and 180 minutes of stand-alone ENL. Students at the Transitioning and Expanding level will receive 180 minutes of ENL, with 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA. We teach using modified balanced literacy, scaffolding, extensive use of visuals, gestures, audio-visual materials, graphic organizers, and computer technology. Our state-certified ENL teachers use the Natural Approach, CALLA, and TPR to ensure that our ELLs meet the standards and achieve at high levels on assessments. In our varied approaches and methods, the second language development of our students is addressed. The ENL teachers work with the classroom and content area teachers so that the instruction is cohesive. We use the texts and materials that the classroom and content area teachers use: Journeys, Code X, and authentic texts that are suitable for the unit. Support is also provided by the use of bilingual picture dictionaries. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? PS/IS 109 uses curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWDs. Our IEP/SETTS teacher, School Psychologist, and the classroom teachers collaborate to create attainable goals and effective instructional strategies to properly meet the needs of our ELL-SWDs. Together, the decision is made as to which setting would most benefit the individual student. Our ENL teachers review the IEPs of the students to tailor instruction for the ELL-SWDs. The ELL-SWDs 1  are part of the integrated and stand-alone sessions and are an integral part of the class, ensuring that they are in the least restrictive environment for ENL and for their other subjects. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ELL students in need of academic intervention support in the areas of ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies will receive a wide range of services. ELLs will be able to utilize the Reading Instructional Goals for Older Readers (RIGOR) program, which utilizes leveled, content-area non-fiction books that teach literacy, comprehension, and decoding skills while providing instruction in the content areas. The ENL teachers will choose reading material that is tailored for the ELLs to support topics being taught in the classrooms. ELLs will receive targeted math instruction from the SETTS and AIS teachers. All instruction in delivered in English, but the ENL teacher and one of the AIS teachers are fluent in Spanish and can assist Spanish speaking students if necessary. Science and Social Studies teachers have access to content area bilingual glossaries for use in the classroom. The content area and ENL teachers review unit tests, writing samples, and other student work to monitor progress in the content areas. Finally, within the Title III program, students will receive academic targeted intervention in English language arts, specifically reading comprehension and writing. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We plan to continue providing rigorous, Common Core aligned instruction for our ELLs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We never had a bilingual program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All programs are available for ELLs to participate. The parents are notified in English and their home language. Our after-school program, the Sports and Arts Foundation, is open to all students. ELLs participate in the The Middle School Quality Initiative (Global Kids). Our Title III programs are designed to meet the academic needs of the ELLs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We use a variety of instructional materials at PS/IS 109. We teach using the RIGOR (Reading Instructional Goals for Older Readers) program, which utilizes leveled, content-area non-fiction books that teach literacy, comprehension, and decoding skills while providing instruction in the content areas. This is useful for all ELLs, but we target the newcomers and students with disabilities who are also ELLs. We are using Journeys, and Code X for instruction, two reading programs that are aligned to the Common Core Standards. Go Math and Envisions are the math curricula used for instruction. These programs have adaptations that are tailored to the needs of our ELLs. Our students have access to iPads, laptop and desktop computers for research and printing their work. ELLs at the Emerging and Entering levels use programs such as Starfall to improve their decoding and reading comprehension skills. Many classrooms are equipped with Smartboards, which provide visual and interactive instruction that is beneficial for all of the ELL subgroups. Our science laboratories are fully stocked with hands-on materials for experiments and effective science instruction, which again supports all ELL subgroups. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support in Haitian Creole and Spanish is provided with bilingual dictionaries and bilingual picture dictionaries. Students speaking other languages will receive support through our multi-lingual staff. In addition, students who are newcomers are assigned “buddies” to assist them. Students are also given bilingual glossaries, available on the State Education website, to assist them with content-area Tier 3 vocabulary. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. We recognize that all students need to be working from age/grade appropriate materials. All materials used within our program are age and grade appropriate. All resources used within our ENL program are New York City/New York State 2  curriculum books that are Common Core aligned. All students are held accountable for grade level New York State Standards and Common Core Standard work. We ensure that services and resources are adapted for ELL-SWDs in many ways. We have content-area books at different levels that convey the same information in Science and Social Studies. The Reading Instructional Goals for Older Readers (RIGOR) program provides books on the same topic at different novels to accommodate readers from the lower to higher levels. These texts correspond to their ages and grades while addressing their cognitive needs. Computer programs such as Starfall are used for newcomers to increase their decoding and reading comprehension skills. Writing assignments are adapted using graphic organizers that are suited for ELLs at different levels of writing ability. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We use a variety of instructional materials at PS/IS 109. We teach using the RIGOR (Reading Instructional Goals for Older Readers) program, which utilizes leveled, content-area non-fiction books that teach literacy, comprehension, and decoding skills while providing instruction in the content areas. This is useful for all ELLs, but we target the newcomers and students with disabilities who are also ELLs. We are using Journeys, Ready Gen and Code X for instruction, two reading programs that are aligned to the Common Core Standards. Go Math and Envisions are the math curricula used for instruction. These programs have adaptations that are tailored to the needs of our ELLs. Our students have access to iPads, laptop and desktop computers for research and printing their work. ELLs at the Emerging and Entering levels use programs such as Starfall to improve their decoding and reading comprehension skills. Many classrooms are equipped with Smartboards, which provide visual and interactive instruction that is beneficial for all of the ELL subgroups. Our science laboratories are fully stocked with hands-on materials for experiments and effective science instruction, which again supports all ELL subgroups. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). PS/IS 109 has no activities for newly enrolled ELL students before the beginning of the school year, nor do we have special activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Our middle school ELLs take the required hours of Spanish instruction. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The licensed ENL teacher attends professional development sessions at different locations throughout the year, in addition to monthly ENL sessions at the district office. These sessions pertain to instructional practices and compliance issues. On Mondays, we will dedicate a professional development session to topics that pertain to the ELLs. All teachers will participate in the professional development sessions. Professional development is offered by the Office of English Language Learners. These sessions are helpful in focusing on methods and practices to support ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards. The sessions also provided methods of differentiating for ELLs/SWDs so that they will be able to accomplish the tasks required of them in the classroom. 3  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our guidance counselors are available to assist ELLs as they transition from elementary to middle school and high school. We will have the licensed ENL teacher conduct professional development sessions that will focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. Agendas and attendance sheets will be used to keep track of the professional development activities. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? We have weekly parent outreach sessions every Tuesday. We contact parents to inform them of the language development progress, assessment results, and language development needs. There are people available to translate. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. ELL parents are invited to the monthly PTA meetings. They are also contacted and informed through monthly ENL newsletters dispensed in English and the home languages. Dialogue between the ENL teacher and the parents of ELLs is encouraged and welcomed. All school and PTA activities are open to parents of ELLs. Pertinent information is disseminated using the School Messenger, which is translated into the home languages. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Our ELLs participate in all special performances, such as our annual Black History program, dance recital, Christmas pageant, multicultural show and dinner, and talent shows. 4 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Kerdy Bertrand, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 5  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Glenwood Academy School DBN: 22K109 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Kerdy Bertrand Title Principal Marina E. Brown Assistant Principal Laurentina Matthew Parent Coordinator Gilda Everett ENL/Bilingual Teacher Leslie-Ann Angus Rosemarie Henry Spanish/ENL Parent Teacher/Subject Area Linda Parnes/Librarian Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Joanne Manganelli School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/31/17 10/31/17 10/31/17 10/31/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 6  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 22k109 School Name: PS/IS 109 Superintendent: Julia Bove The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Gilda Everett ENL teacher No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. At PS/IS 109, we use the information from Part III of the Home Identification Survey to acquire information about the language preferences of the parents. When the ENL teacher initially conducts the interview with the parent and child while the HLIS form is being filled out, the language preference is discussed. Upon registration, the parent also fills out a form stating what language is preferred for communication from the school. This is also indicated on the Student Emergency Contact cards and ATS RCPL reports. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 7  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic Bengali (Bangla) Croatian French Haitian Creole Jamaican Creole English Russian Spanish (American) Sign Language Tamil Urdu 3 0 0 10 48 1 661 2 60 2 0 3 0.38 0 0 1.27 6.08 0.13 83.67 0.25 7.59 0.25 0 0.38 4 1 1 7 57 1 652 3 59 3 1 3 0.38 0.13 0.13 0.89 7.22 0.13 81.53 0.25 7.47 0.38 0,13 0.38 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. There are no languages that represent at least a 10% population of our school, excluding the ones listed above. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families - Annual Handbook Distributed at the beginning of the school year, September - General overview of student curriculum Distributed at the beginning of the school year, September - New York State testing dates Distributed at the beginning of the school year, September - Newsletters - Calendars Distributed bimonthly Monthly Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. With the assistance of the DOE resources, documents are translated for parents in a timely manner. With the assistance of the DOE resources, documents are translated for parents in a timely manner. With the assistance of the DOE resources, documents are translated for parents in a timely manner. DOE resources 8  - Parent-teacher conference announcements As per the DOE yearly calendar DOE resources - After-school program information Distributed throughout the school year DOE resources as needed - Letters from the School Leadership Team Distributed throughout the school year DOE resources as needed 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school - Meet The Teacher Night - Parent Teacher Conferences - Parent Engagement Meeting plan to provide interpretation service(s)? When needed, a staff member who speaks the native language will be called upon to translate. - September 13, 2017 - November 16, 2017 and March 7, 2018 - May 9, 2018 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We verify and update contact information throughout the school year. We exhaust the names on the contact list provided by the parent/guardian. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. In September, the administration and staff of P.S./I.S 109 meet together to discuss the Chancellor's Regulations. The confirmation is emailed to each member of the staff and a follow-up signature is required from the staff. The staff was 9  provided with a copy of the specific instructions on how to use the translation services and the over-the-phone Interpreter Services. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We will fulfill parental notification requirements for translation and interpretation services using Google Translate and in-house school staff. Signs, brochures, and fliers that are sent from the DOE are already translated into the various high-incidence languages represented in New York City. These documents are disseminated to the limited-English proficient parents. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent comments and feedback are extremely important to us at P.S./I.S. 109. We will gather feedback from parents by using the annual parent survey, and will adjust our practices accordingly. 0 
