 15K118 School Name: THE MAURICE SENDAK COMMUNITY SCHOOL Principal: W ELIZABET GARRAWAY   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: The Maurice Sendak Community School 15k000118 Pre-k, kindergarten, 1 st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th School Address: 211 8thStreet Brooklyn, NY 11215 School Number (DBN): 15k118 Phone Number: 718 8405660 Fax: 7188405666 School Contact Person: Elizabeth Garraway Email Address: WGarraway@schools.nyc.gov Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Elizabeth Garraway Victoria Morey Parents’ Association President: Roy Griffith and Ruffy Roy SLT Chairperson: Victoria Morey Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: n/a n/a n/a District Information Geographical District: 15 Superintendent: Anita Skop Superintendent’s Office Address: 131 Livingston St., Brooklyn, NY 11201 Superintendent’s Email Address: Askop@schools.nyc.gov Phone: 718-935-4317 Phone Number: Fax: Fax: 718-935-4356 Field Support Center (FSC) FSC: Brooklyn North Field Support Center Executive Director: Bernadette Fitzgerald Executive Director’s Office Address: 131 Livingston St., Brooklyn, NY 11201 Executive Director’s Email Address: ( BFitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 718-935-3954 Fax: 718-935-3414   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Elizabeth Garraway Victoria Morey Roy Griffith and Ruffy Roy Teresa Bazzi Kim Landman Maria Heredia Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member parent Member/ parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Colleen Cruz KassandraMinor RonniHorowitz Heidi Sauberg Member/parent Member/parent Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission Statement: Section 4: CEP Overview The Maurice Sendak Community School is a small, collaborative learning community dedicated to fostering intellectual curiosity and a life-long love of learning. Using an interdisciplinary, inquiry based approach, we prepare our students to be problem solvers and creative thinkers as they develop a strong sense of social responsibility to our global community. Our multicultural education provides a myriad of opportunities for cross-cultural understanding among our students. We use a workshop approach to teaching and differentiate the curriculum to meet the needs of   individual students at all levels. We cultivate a high level of parent involvement and aim for high academic achievement for our students. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The six Core Values of our school are: Positive Attitudes, Creativity, Independence, Inclusiveness, Collaboration and Joy. You will see these values embedded in everything that we do. One of our school’s greatest strengths is the way independence and collaboration are fostered in both students and staff. While teachers plan each unit together (goals, pacing, assessments and possible lessons), teachers are given flexibility in determining what they want to focus on based on student need and interest. Children are highly independent. They are allowed to select their own reading and writing material, strategies for solving math problems, and activities for choice time. However, they also participate in group activities throughout the day where they are required to problem solve with partners, compromise, and use their verbal skills to accommodate the group. The ease with which both independence and collaboration have been incorporated into the school is a result of the leadership’s trust in teachers and children to make the right decisions – which has been modeled by leadership from the school’s inception. Partnerships are imperative for a new school’s success. Currently, 15k118 works with the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project for support in ELA. We have hired Studio in the School for a year-long residency to integrate art into the school’s curriculum. For Physical Education, we partner with Mighty Milers and Together in Dance, and to provide enrichment during lunch time recess and the school day. Parents support our school through volunteering on all committees, working in the cafeteria and library, speaking to children about their careers, and singing and reading with children. Parents are involved in our after school program as well, providing enrichment to students in areas such as art. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our learning environment promotes collaboration among students, teachers, administrators and parents to excite curiosity, motivate learning and build trust and respect for others. We have a special population of 5 ENL students and 35 students who have IEP 's. Many of our special needs population require additional support with phonics and help with auditory processing through speech. Early childhood classrooms have teaching assistants in each classroom. Additionally, we have teaching assistants who provide 1 on 1 Reading Rescue services in and out of the classroom to students who are struggling in reading. With relation to the Framework for Great Schools and the analysis of student data, we have made strategic adjustments to the curriculum, both formative and anecdotal. After carefully evaluating the subjectivity of the running record protocol currently in use, we've moved to the Fountas and Pinnell assessment to ensure that students are accurately evaluated. Upper grades use the Independent Reading Assessment (IRA) to assess students' reading level and comprehension. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Distributive leadership is a cornerstone of the school. PS 118 faces challenges common to a fairly new and growing school. Because we have a small staff, all members are required to wear many hats. And because we have added grades every year, new resources must be regularly purchased and new teachers trained in the ways of our unique community. Our key areas of focus for this school year are working to fully develop all protocols for self-assessment and review that will be used as our school grows.   0  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 15K118 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 307 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 13 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 14 11 13 13 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 14.0% % Attendance Rate 10.7% % Reduced Lunch 1.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 11.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 58.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.25 0% 18% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 90.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 1 1 13 95.4% 2.9% 11.4% 11.4% 8.5% 10.4% 0 0% 5.2 89.3% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The Maurice Sendak Community School strives to teach students to be problem solvers and creative thinkers. We believe that students will be better prepared to work in the real world if they are able to make connections and work with people who have various skills and ideas to contribute to a given project or situation. Based on SLT meetings, teacher input, parent feedback and student assessments, we concluded that an integrated, inquiry based curriculum would support our mission and help disseminate our school’s values (creativity, joy, inclusiveness, collaboration, independence and positive attitudes). PS 118 has been successful thus far by ensuring collaborative planning time for teachers. This time occurs during common prep periods and occasionally on Monday and Tuesday afternoons. We have also developed partnerships with families and other community organizations to add enrichment to our curriculum. We work with Teachers College Reading and Writing Project, and share a part time Assistant Principal with our sister school P.S. 321. Additionally, we belong to a Learning Partners group in District 15. Several of our teachers visit schools in the group to observe teaching practices and share resources. This enables us to share best practices between the schools. This year we have hired a full time Assistant Principal to assist in curriculum planning and provide teachers with needed resources. Teacher inquiry of student work has resulted in school-wide instructional coherence and increased student achievement for all learners. Teacher leaders communicate key instructional decisions to the administration to effectively impact student learning. For example, in reflecting on student data, the vertical team determined that the TERC math program was not sufficiently challenging for students. Consequently we reviewed several math math programs to determine the appropriate math curriculum to meet needs of students. We decided on EngageNY. Beginning in Kindergarten, students are taught foundational skills and strategies that are built upon through the upper grades. The adjustments to the curriculum are seen in principal observations and re-evaluated during the inquiry cycle. We utilize accessible ongoing checks for understanding in all classrooms. For example, teachers will ask students to "Put a thumb under your chin if you know what this word means," or "Thumbs up if you understand your job today," and consistently use an array of questions to conduct student checks during the lessons. Our educational assistants focus their check-ins on students whose data indicate they need additional support throughout every lesson, even if they do not ask for help or support. We recently launched our Exercise Your Brain program. This program is a research and play-based alternative to homework. It allows students to choose activities from a monthly menu. These self-directed activities incorporate content and skills taught in the classroom and allow children to engage with their families while doing them. We have found that these types of activities are accessible for all of our students and help them become critical, independent 2  thinkers. These EYB projects are presented in class, which gives students a chance to practice their speaking skills as well. Teachers incorporate technology into their classrooms beginning in 1st grade. This year our first grade students were part of a coding residency in which each child learned how to code using an age appropriate program. Students in the lower grades use Ipads to read books and reinforce math skills. We have two laptop carts that are accessible for all teachers to use in their lessons. Teachers in the upper grades have created a digital curriculum in which students learn word processing and publishing skills. Students in these grades receive their own Chrome Book to use throughout the day. They learn about the importance of digital citizenship through research and blogging activities. Our staff is continually attending professional development and continues to collaborate with parents on how we can make PS 118 a stronger community and learning environment. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of students will experience an integrated, inquiry based curriculum that connects all content area subjects: Science, Reading, Math, Writing, Social Studies, Spanish, Technology and Art. Evidence of this integration will be apparent in final projects and end of unit celebrations. If students can perform the given task 80% of the time then we will know they have achieved our goal for them. 3 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students Sept. 2018-19 Administration All students Sept. 2018-19 Part-time Assistant Principal Educational Assistants Sept. 2018-19 Principal All students Sept. 2018-19 Principal Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Partnerships with TCRWP, Together in Dance, LEAP, Studio in a School, to provide additional enrichment activities that support the work students are doing in the content areas. The residency teachers will co-plan with classroom teachers on how to execute multi-cultural and common core aligned lessons. The Science teacher will co-plan with classroom teachers and provide PD on using the Inquiry method to support curriculum and best practices. Planning time provided for Educational Assistants and classroom teachers. Common planning time for classroom teachers to develop grade level curriculum that incorporates all content areas weekly. Partnerships with parents include Curriculum Night, School Leadership Team (SLT) meetings once a month and 1 to 1 parent meetings as needed. We'll also hold a Math Night where families play math games together and parents gain an understanding of the strategies and math curriculum their children are being taught in school. Additionally there will be a Literacy Night where families can learn several literacy strategies that can help support their child at home. The system we utilize to ensure the activities are implemented during SLT meetings, members will vote on which events to schedule. We then add the dates to a Google Docs Calendar and assign committees to plan and execute the events. We also have a partnership with the Brooklyn Conservatory. They provide band and chorus instruction to older students. Parents are invited to attend student performances throughout the year. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Family engagement is fundamental to building strong schools. One of the main main reasons why our school has been so successful is that we have worked extremely hard to make sure that families understand Rigorous Instruction and 4  the value of the Common Core. Here are some ways that will support families in that area in the 2018-2019 school year: All classroom teachers will give curriculum conferences in September and June. Teachers in all subject areas will write monthly newsletters with detailed examples of student work and expectations in all areas. Our parent coordinator will give seminars about ways parents can support students at home. The principal will host an open session for questions and answers ( breakfast with principal and/or P.T.A. co-presidents). Teachers will use Tuesday parent engagement times to discuss ways that parents can support work that is being done at home. We will encourage parents to collaborate will students in doing their Exercise Your Brains projects at least twice a month. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● 2 Common planning periods per week and after school P.D. on Mondays ● PTA, fair student funding and Pre-k funding to pay for partnerships with TCRWP, Together in Dance, Studio in a School, and LEAP Fair student funding to pay for a special education part-time F status teacher. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Immigrant C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Integrated Unit Plans from Classroom teachers and Science/Art teachers will be collected regularly by the Principal and Assistant Principal. Teacher feedback from residencies will be collected at the end of each cycle to assess effectiveness of partnerships. By February 2019 100% of the students are experiencing an integrated curriculum 60% of the week. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Teachers are constantly assessing student work. Every day, teachers conference with students and review their work. Teachers assess students individually or in small groups. Some concrete forms of assessment include: F and P running records, IRA's, pre-assessments, end of unit assessments, rubrics in every area to measure student learning and th see if students have met goals, oral presentations and sharing of work, writing assessments and sprints. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Our ELA program is strategically planned and highly effective. Most of our students are reading at or above grade level. Teachers take regular conference notes on children which are used to monitor progress. Our classrooms are provisioned with both leveled and genre/interest libraries and students have choice when selecting reading materials. Teachers model strategies for children, which students then replicate independently. Educational Assistants have been trained in the Reading Rescue program and attend workshops at Teachers College to provide individual support for struggling students. All classroom teachers receive monthly PD from our TC staff developer. Additionally, grade level teachers collaborate regularly to share best practices and ideas/thoughts related to current units of study. They are continually updating their pacing calendars to reflect the academic needs and levels of their students. Similarly, teachers are beginning to work on vertical teams to look at student work. During this time, teachers provided each other with instructional materials and ideas to help support students working above and below grade level. This time is also used to ensure that students are receiving appropriate foundational skills to be successful in future grades. Students collaborate with their peers as well. They work together in book clubs, reading partnerships, student led small group work, and book buddies across grades. This form of collaboration is very powerful and gives students a sense of ownership over their work. Students are supported and challenged by our rigorous workshop model of teaching, where teachers work with students in small groups and individually to provide maximum support. Service providers sit in on mini-lessons when working with small groups of children. However, we need to continue to develop our teachers’ facility with small group instruction and strategy groups to meet the needs of all our students – those performing above and below grade level. As stated in our previous Quality Review, our "school has developed a culture of mutual accountability for the well-defined high expectations, for both teachers and students that are well aligned to the Danielson Framework. This has resulted in successful partnerships with staff and families that support student progress toward meeting those expectations." Our strengths as a school relative to this are that because of the size of the school, communication is ongoing and consistent. "Parents knowledgeably share school-wide goals and state that the principal is a "hands on person who is there for us."" Additionally, our Quality Report states that "Students develop the skills needed to truly prepare them to be college and career ready by participating in inquiry projects that empower students to develop questions and explore real world learning." Our priority needs are to incorporate the workshop model of instruction in Reading, and provide small group instruction through guided reading and strategy groups so that by June, 2019, 85% of students will have met benchmark based on F & P reading levels. Additionally to continue building on our teaching and learning through inquiry projects and to incorporate technology and PBL (project based learning). Added to that, our goals are to continue to provide our students with a classroom and school culture where students feels safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 2 – Annual Goal 6  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 85% of students will have met benchmark based on F & P reading levels and all teachers will have incorporated the workshop model of instruction in Reading, by providing small group instruction through guided reading and strategy groups. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). All teachers will be trained by TC staff developer on reading and writing strategies. Teachers will participate in workshops offered by Teachers College on site. Teachers will provide informational meetings for parents. Families will be updated regularly on their child's progress and how they can support their child's ongoing, newly learned reading strategies at home. Staff will participate in a study group around the book written by Jennifer Sarravallo: Teaching Reading in Small Groups: Differentiated Instruction for Building Strategic, Independent Readers . Educational Assistants will continue their training in the Reading Rescue intervention program. As they are working with struggling readers they will continually analyse data on the progress of students. Teachers and Educational Assistants will check-in at weekly meetings to go over the data so they will continue to challenge and push their students forward. Teachers will utilize Monday professional development time to evaluate assessments and design strategy lessons and guided reading groups. They will also participate in learning walks within our school and at the schools of our Learning Partners. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All staff members Sept. 2018-19 TC staff developers Principal and AP All staff All staff members Sept. 2018-19 TC staff developer, staff, Principa and AP Educational Assistants Struggling readers Sept. 2018-19 Principal, AP, Classroom teachers, and educational assistants All teachers All students Sept. 2018- 2019 Principal. AP Teachers will identify students who need intervention services using the RTI form. Teachers and service providers will collaborate to ensure that services are aligned with classroom instruction. All teachers Sept. 2018-2019 Service providers Principal, AP, classroom teachers, service providers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Students learn best when they feel safe and supported academically and socially in school and at home. All classroom teachers will give curriculum conferences in September and May. In these conferences, they will delineate ways in which parents can provide a supportive environment at home. Teachers in all subject areas will write monthly newsletters with detailed examples of strategies used in school to encourage students to do their best and to persevere. Families will also be given the opportunity to participate in our Exercise Your Brain (EYB) initiative. Students work with their families to support learning at home through hands on activities related to content area 8  curricula. Families will be given opportunities to attend staff-led workshops geared towards grade-level EYB. Staff will provide families with resources, answers and ideas related to EYB. Parents are invited to attend monthly gatherings at Families as Learning Partners in which they go into the classrooms to see what their child is learning. Families may do a craft, play a game or learn a skill from their child. Additionally, families are invited to attend a Literacy Night and Math Night during the school year. Families are always invited to attend classroom celebrations and performances, such as Hip Hop, African Drumming, chorus and Together in Dance. Parents are invited and encouraged to meet with teachers during parent engagement hours on Tuesday afternoons. Our parent coordinator is available by appointment to speak with parents individually about ways win which we support different student needs. The principal will host an open session for questions and answers several times throughout the year on an going basis (breakfast with principal and/or P.T.A. co-presidents). Ms. Garraway is also available throughout the year to meet with parents to discuss students' academic and social needs. Teachers will use Tuesday parent engagement times to discuss ways that parents can support work that is being done at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The budget we use is Fair Student Funding. The resources we will leverage to achieve our goal are SETTS and small groups, Teachers College, Learning Partners and Inter-school visitations. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will engage in progress monitoring as a part of our overall cycle of continuous improvement planning in the first week of February 201. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teachers are constantly assessing student work. Every day, teachers conference with students and review their work. Teachers assess students individually or in small groups. Some concrete forms of assessment include: F and P running records, IRA, pre-assessments, end of unit assessments, rubrics in every area to measure student learning and to see if students have met goals, oral presentations and sharing of work, student self-assessment, ongoing goal setting, writing assessments and sprints. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We are a growing school. Every year, we have the task of hiring new teachers and aligning the curriculum on grade levels. Teachers selected common Social Studies and Science themes, and worked together to develop units with common goals and skills. We collaborate annually to revise and update our curricula. Our Quality Review Report states that school leaders and faculty ensure that curricula are aligned to the Common Core, content standards and strategically integrate the instructional shifts, ensuring that rigorous habits and higher-order skills are emphasized across the curricula and academic tasks and are embedded in a coherent way across grades and subjects. Teacher inquiry of student work has resulted in school-wide instructional coherence and increased student achievement for all learners. Teacher leaders communicate key instructional decisions to the administration to effectively impact student learning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all grades will have designed a Common Core aligned curriculum that is consistently implemented across all classrooms on that grade resulting in a common curriculum. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The hiring of an Assistant Principal to work with teachers on curriculum and teaching strategies. The AP will meet with teachers bi-monthly to check-in and provide support. The AP will observe classroom work/play and will suggest systems and structures that may be needed in order to ensure effective strategies for teaching and learning are being followed. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? grade level teams and students Sept. 2018-19 AP and Principal The writing of monthly newsletters that informs parents of grade wide activities and learning. Parents are invited into the classrooms for Families as Learning Partners and to hold birthday or cultural celebrations. grade level teams and students Sept. 2018-19 Principal Regular common preps and after-school PD time to continue creating and collaborating on a pacing calendar and unit plans. Scheduled meetings with our TC staff developer and guidance counselor for strategies to use in all classrooms. Students may be identified as needing extra support in specific academic or social emotional areas and teachers can seek the guidance of the TC staff developer and guidance counselor. grade level teams and students grade level teams and students Sept. 201819 Principal Sept. 2018-19 Principal TC Staff Developer Social Worker 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. All classroom teachers will give curriculum conferences in September and May. Teachers in all subject areas will write monthly newsletters informing parents of upcoming units of study. They will also list ways in which parents can collaborate with teachers. Our parent coordinator will give seminars about ways parents can collaborate with teachers to support students at home. The principal will host a open sessions for questions and answers throughout the year (breakfast with principal and P.T.A. co-presidents). Teachers will use Tuesday parent engagement time to discuss parent-teacher collaboration that will have a direct impact on how parents can support work that is being done at home. We will encourage parents to collaborate with teachers on how they can provide support to their students with their Exercise Your Brains projects to do at least twice a month. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 1  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The resources we'll leverage will be flexible scheduling and hiring per diem substitute teachers as needed to cover classes when classroom teachers are meeting with the staff developer or attending off-side PD's. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. A Principal review of monthly unit plans and the grade newsletter to families. By February 2019, PS 118 staff will meet to assess whether the annual goal has been reached by a mid-point benchmark of at least 70%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use the information that teachers upload on the Google drive to assess whether teachers are aligned on the grade. Teachers will use common prep to collaborate and upload lesson plans, unit plans, and example of student work and expectations. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. At the end of the school year, the Principal will survey teachers regarding topics they want covered during school-wide PDs. Based on the survey results, a semester long differentiated PD calendar will be created to meet the varied needs of the PS 118 staff. In order to develop teacher leadership, teachers will be asked to lead cycles of workshops during PD time as well. As stated in our previous Quality Review, "School leaders and faculty ensure that curricula are aligned to the Common Core, content standards and strategically integrate the instructional shifts, ensuring that rigorous habits and higher-order skills are emphasized across the curricula and academic tasks and are embedded in a coherent way across grades and subjects." Other strengths which are reflected in our most recent QR are that "the level of coherence at the school is remarkable in that not only do all teachers use the same grade level curriculum maps they collaborate to develop, but they also work collectively to craft unit and lesson plans and present them to students at the same time." With respect to the Framework for great schools, the QR states that "workshops on the Common Core and other instructional priorities keep parents well informed and highly engaged. Because of the size of the school communication is ongoing and consistent...Teachers comment that, "The principal makes the community joyous." Parents knowledgeably share school-wide goals and state that the principal is a "hands on person who is there for us." They comment on the ongoing information that they receive from the school about their children's progress in emails, conferences and ongoing conversations." As distributive leadership is the cornerstone of the school, teachers and educational assistants who request professional development are given space by the principal to do so. All teachers and educational assistants go to the same workshops and are trained in reading rescue, writing and math. When teachers reflected that there was limited Common Core alignment to math currciulum, the Principal incorporated EngageNY into the math curriculum. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of staff will have participated in weekly professional development led by staff, administration and/or other professional organizations that are specifically geared toward developing teacher leaders while meeting the academic and Social and Emotional needs of the school community. The qualitative evidence of this is discussed during PD time when teachers are asked to provide helpful feedback. The expectation is that 100% of teachers will state that the school invites teachers to play a role in setting goals and making important decisions for the school. 3 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All staff Sept. 2018-19 All staff Principal All staff Sept. 2018-19 All staff, Principal, AP, TC staff developer, SPED coordinator All staff Principal Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Survey of teacher instructional and social emotional needs. The development of a semester long PD calendar. Identification of teacher leaders to provide PD cycles. End of year teacher conferences with the principal. Principal led PDs on the topics of assessment, pedagogy and planning developed in conjunction with AP, TC staff developer, SPED coordinator. End of year teacher conferences with the principal. Parents as learning partners/Family Fridays. Literacy/EYB Night, Math Night and Community events at the beginning and end of the school year. Open house night in May for families. All staff, PS 118 families Sept. 2018-19 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. All classroom teachers will give curriculum conferences in September and May. They will include ways in which the school school is working to build effective school leadership. Teachers in all subject areas will write monthly newsletters with information about upcoming units of studies. Our parent coordinator will give seminars about ways parents can support students at home. The principal will host an open session for questions and answers regularly ( breakfast with principal and P.T.A. co-presidents). Teachers will use Tuesday parent engagement times to discuss ways that parents can support work that is being done at home. The principal is available to discuss Effective School Leadership. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The resources we'll leverage will be flexible scheduling and hiring per diem substitute teachers as needed to cover classes when classroom teachers are meeting with the staff developer or attending off-side PD's. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 4  X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In January, teachers will be informally surveyed regarding two areas: (1) whether the first semester PD calendar supported their instructional and social emotional needs; (2) what additional PD they need for the second semester. By February, PS 118 staff will meet to assess whether the annual goal has been reached by a mid-point benchmark of at least 70%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will calculate the number of PDs done by principal, and teachers and compare the quality of those PD with respect to the previous year. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A major goal of our school’s vision is for our students to be successful in the area of social responsibility and citizenship. Maurice Sendak was a great example of someone who was inclusive and showed empathy and respect for others. We strive to cultivate an environment where students can discover the joys of helping each other and discover the simple ways that they can help those who are less fortunate. As stated in the most recent Quality Review Report, the "level of mutual accountability is seen in interactions with parents and in the way teachers focus their students. Students are responsible for their own behavioral needs and comfortably say, "I need a moment for a break," when they are upset. They are also responsible for others, as they see themselves as "friends who take care of each other." Another major finding in the QRR exemplifying strong family and community ties is how "in collaboration with parents, students undertook a Transit Inquiry Study that used technology to expand actual transit system experiences. They made metro cards, created their own conductor booth and created their own subway map. These opportunities, coupled with the school's focus on social emotional support and rigorous instruction including the arts and foreign language, provide students with a plethora or skills needed to succeed at the next academic level and ensure a seamless transition." A priority need will be to continue to nurture this sense of social responsibility and citizenship in our upper elementary grade students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of our students will engage in programs and systems that help develop their social responsibility within our school, the larger Brooklyn community, and extend to the global community. Specifically, students will be introduced to and immersed in our Character Education Program. Students will read books about specific character traits and participate in community activities that showcase these traits. The impact of these programs will be measured through formative assessments such as whole class conversations, written reflections of the students, students surveys, and through opinion pieces evaluated using a rubric. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The development of a character education curriculum by staff. Cycles of observation and learning walks are ways of overseeing this goal. Student involvement in community projects including: food drives, UNICEF, coat drive. The Food and Coat drives will benefit organizations who help those in need in our neighborhood community. All students 2018-19 All students 2018-19 Teachers, Parents, Principal Staff and Parents Principal Student led service projects and civic engagement. All students 2018-19 Staff and Principal Authentic writing projects where students are taught to voice their opinions about ways to improve their community during persuasive writing units. End of project celebrations will be held where parents are invited into the classroom to share in their children's work. Parents model the importance of volunteerism by supporting the school in the cafeteria, in the school-yard, at center time and at school-wide events. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All students 2018-19 Classroom teachers All students 2018-19 Parents, Parent Coordinator If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. UNICEF, Civic Council, CHIPS, Brooklyn Meeting House, Girl Scouts Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The resources we'll leverage will be flexible scheduling and hiring per diem substitute teachers as needed to cover classes when classroom teachers are having grade-wide planning or attending off-side PD's. Parents volunteer their time which ensures a strong school community, so that all students succeed. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 7  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. School Leadership Team (SLT) and Parent Association (PA) surveys will be done at the mid-point of the school year in February to indicate school progress toward meeting the goal. Additionally we'll have cycles of persuasive writing. By February 100% of the students are experiencing an Strong-Family-Community Ties. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use rubrics and surveys and look at student work to determine what progress has been made. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) F&P running records IRA's Student work Conference notes Anecdotal records Conversations with families Unit assessments Student work Conference notes Conversations with families Unit Assessments Student work Conference notes Assessments Project based rubrics Student work Conference notes PPT SPED coordinator Counseling Speech Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Reading Rescue LLI Guided, interactive reading and writing Conferring Workshop model whole group, small group, partner and individual instruction. Conferring Math conference Hands on math Inquiry Project based Experiential hands on learning Push in and pull-out Workshop model whole group, small group, partner and individual instruction Workshop model whole group, small group, partner and individual instruction Workshop model whole group, small group, partner and individual instruction Workshop model whole group, small group, partner and individual instruction School day School day School day School day School day 9  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We provide books, school supplies, donated clothes and counselling. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). We have no students in Temporary Housing. We have no students in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 0  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. <we do not have any students in temporary housing 1  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 2  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 3  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 4  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The Maurice Sendak Community School P.S. 118, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students he Maurice Sendak Community School P.S. 118, will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The 5 Parental Involvement and School Quality  school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; 6  ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Maurice Sendak Community School P.S. 118 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents a by the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 7  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 8  ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 9  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 15 School Name The Maurice Sendak Community School Borough Brooklyn School Number 118 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal W. Elizabeth Garraway Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Heidi Sauberg Teacher/Subject Area Maria Masourides/ Kindergarten Teacher/Subject Area Laura Willeford/3rd grade Related-Service Provider Superintendent Anita Skop Assistant Principal Beth Handman Coach School Counselor Eileen Tsuji Parent Parent Coordinator Mariateresa Bazzi Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 0  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 284 Total number of ELLs 3 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 1.06% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 4 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis O O 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 O O 0 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? As a school we use Fountas and Pinnell (F&P) to assess the students in English. The assessment is done about three times a year or more often for students not at benchmark level. The data suggests that new students become fluent readers in English on grade level within three years. This assessment tool allows the teacher to look carefully at comprehension and vocabulary development as well as phonetic understandings and conventions. It is also interesting to note that children who are able to read grade level text in F&P are more likely to reach commanding level on the NYSESLAT. Going forward this data will allow us to predict more accurately the instructional areas of focus for those students we will continue serving and to appropriately guide students that require more support in English language development. This data will allow us to fine tune intervention services and pinpoint areas of difficulty of individual students and to target these skills. 1  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We use F & P assessment data to plan lessons that focus on areas our students may be struggling to comprehend. This year, for example, a Spanish speaking ENL had difficulty differentiating between the "E" and "I" sounds. We designed lessons that supported this students practice reading, listening to and writing words with these different sounds. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? As a relatively new school we have not yet had the opportunity to collect sufficient, relevant data. This is the second year we have ENL students. (Last year we had one student in Kindergarten who received a commanding on the NYSESLAT and will soon transition out of the ENL program.) Currently we have 3 - ENL students: 1 in Kindergarten, 1 in 1st grade & 1 in 3rd. Going forward, once we have enough data, we'll compare their scores with other ENL students as well as their English speaking peers. In the future, as our school grows, and grades 4 & 5 are added, in order to evaluate the success of the ELL's in our school, we'll continue to look at Fountas & Pinnell running record assessments, teacher developed, grade-wide math assessments, ongoing conferences in math, reading and writing, and the ELA, Math, and NYSESLAT scores. We will ensure that we meet AYP for ELLs and that our program is successful. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? After gathering students' summative data, we review and decide what curriculum will best suit the needs of those students. Our lesson planning and pacing are designed to support these students learning and to enable them to be successful in reaching benchmarks and continue to move forward. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] As a school, we utilize RtI to support struggling students. We begin with informal classroom observations, evaluation of student work, conversations with parents and formal assessments to determine supports for students. Should we find that a student is not moving at an appropriate pace we provide Tier II interventions that currently are small groups/individual instruction within the classroom. We have two adults in each classroom and they provide individualized attention and small group instruction. The school looks closely at and will develop more mandated support if needed. Given the fact that ELLs are not a monolithic group we are careful to look at all contributing factors that can be altered to support English development and academic success. Any future ELL students that would be in the position of needing additional support, would be given the necessary support to make sure that they become more successful. We would track their growth through student work. If it is determined that a student would benefit from the additional mandated support of Special Education services, the RtI would be used to determine need or eligibility. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. This is the second year we have ENL students. Last year we had only ONE in Kindergarten and she received a Commanding on the NYSESLAT so will be transitioning out of the program. This year we have THREE, including this student (1 in Kindergarten, 1 in 1st grade and 1 in 3rd grade.) We are working on analysing their data and will continue working to discover trends. Two of our ENL student's parents are fluent in English. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Our whole staff meets usually once weekly (we are a small school) and we collaborate on relevant data and break into small groups to work on tailoring our curriculum to suit the needs of our students. Similarly, our ENL teacher communicates regularly with our ENL students' classroom teachers to ensure that covering areas of difficulty. Part IV: ELL Programming 2  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. In our freestanding ENL program, students will be grouped by grade at times and at other times by proficiency level. All of the students that are newcomers or at the beginning level will receive 180 minutes of Stand Alone ENL in order to develop language skills necessary to access what is happening in the classroom. The other 180 minutes are given as integrated ENL as a support to developing a better understanding of content within the curriculum. In order to meet the needs of our students as they become more sufficient as per CR 154, we will deliver instruction aligned to support the curriculum in their classrooms. While student skills are emerging, we'll support them with 90 minutes of Stand Alone ENL and 270 minutes of integrated ENL, and then as skills progress we'll move to the more integrated support of ENL that is aligned to support students in developing academic language skills that in turn support content area within the classroom. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A at this time. c. DL program. If applicable. N/A at this time. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Push-in and pull-out services are provided to our current beginner Kindergarten ELL student. Our 1 current expanding 3rd grader and 1 current commanding students receive integrated ENL. In the future, as our school grows, in order to meet the mandates of our students, they are given an array of support both in homogeneous grouping that focuses on targeting skills that enable access to the curriculum, and then support in integrated groups that allow them to develop proficiency in grade level content area assignments. The ELL teacher will coordinate scheduling to insure that the mandates are met, and the appropriate support is given for these students. Students at the Entering Level are given 360 minutes of ENL support, 180 in stand alone ENL instruction, and the other 180 in integrated groups to support the ELA progress. Students at the Emerging Level are given less stand alone (90 minutes), and then the rest is integrated ENL. Intermediate and Advanced (Transitioning/Expanding) will be given 180 minutes of instruction in integrated ENL. Our Commanding students will be added to other integrated groups to support the transition to independent work. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Teachers plan intentionally for content, literacy, and language objectives using: literacy data (F&P Benchmark in either one language or both languages); NYSITELL/NYSELSAT data; Monthly Guided Reading Reports; CCLS (inclusive of Reading, Writing, Speaking and Listening, Reading Foundational Standards, and Language Standards); our core curricula--TCRWP Units of Studies, Foundations, Estrellita, Inquiry Based units which integrate literacy and the NYCDOE Scope and Sequence for Science, NYCDOE Scope and Sequence for Social Studies, Math Units of Studies aligned to CCLS; and knowledge of best literacy and ELL research based practices. All instruction is given in English, but native language support is given when needed. As our school grows, at times it will make the most sense to pull small groups of ENL from a single grade to work on a writing project where the teacher may brainstorm vocabulary, use a graphic organizer to show the structure of the essay, or encourage and teach use of translation dictionaries and/or technology to support vocabulary in writing. At other times the support may rest on building the foundational skills needed to reach common core expectations. For example, students may need to learn the alphabet and corresponding sounds in order to begin to develop skills that will allow them to access the readings on their grade level. Push in and pull out models will be based on the needs of the students. Depending on the teaching objective, they 3  may use TPR (Total Physical Response), collaborative and cooperative projects, language experience approaches, and/or Cognitive Academic Learning Approaches. In general, the school philosophy is one that supports direct experiences as a way to construct ideas, and is language rich in all areas. This will present great opportunities for our ENL students. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We will use the SOLOM Rubric to assess students social and academic oral production. We will align it to the NYSELSAT speaking rubrics to assess for additional oral language development. Teacher teams will meet and analyze student transcripts and videos using these rubrics along with the above data, and resources to intentionally target language outcomes. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Our teachers differentiate instruction based on the levels of the students. We provide push in and pull out services and the provider takes the material taught in the classroom and breaks it down to the level of the ELL student. They use a lot of visuals and work with the student in Reading, Writing, and Math, as well as Social Interaction Times: Center Time, Outdoor Play, Snack and Lunch times. A. For SIFE students it is important that we address the underlying splintered skills as well as developing new English language skills. In these cases, SIFE students may require more support throughout the day. This means that on top of ENL services, the student would require support to catch them up to their current grade level. B. Newcomers will be given 180 minutes of ENL standalone services in order to develop basic language skills along with 180 minutes of integrated ENL in order to develop common core skills. Because newcomers are working on basic language skills, it is generally a pull out service. At times it can be push in to support acclimation to the classroom work. C. We expect that as our school grows and we enroll additional developing ELL's, they'll master many of the basic skills, and we'll continue to provide instruction enabling them to develop deeper understandings of language as well as scaffolding support to meet the Common Core Standards in all content areas. These supports will be push in or pull out based on the proficiency task. D. So far, in our school we have not had any long term ELL's. In the rare instance that we do, and in the case that these ELL students are possibly also identified as SWD, these students will be given both ENL support services along with special education services in order to develop strategies that ensure their academic progress. E. ELL's will be given support and testing accommodations as needed. These students will require Integrated ENL and will be supported in their transition to independence. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? At this time we do not have any students who are both ELL and SWD. However, if in the instance that we do, teachers of ELL-SWD's will offer targeted instruction that builds on oral language development and English literacy skills through explicit teaching. All ELL-SWD's would work in grade level materials when appropriate. It's anticipated that in many cases they will need support to complete assignments and will develop specific strategies to increase vocabulary and word attack, problem solving and computation skills as well as the use of graphic organizers, brainstorming vocabulary and structure, and grammar in writing assignments. They will receive all related mandated services. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? We provide push-In and pull-out services so that the ELL has individualized support in and out of their classroom. If in the future we have students who are ELL-SWD's, they would be placed in a Collaborative Teaching classroom and will receive the support services in ENL and within the ICT classroom. This will minimize time out of the classroom. In cases where students have been placed in General Education classrooms, the ENL and SETTS teacher will meet periodically in order to ensure the student is progressing, or they will adjust the services to meet his/her needs. 4  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. We provide targeted instruction as per student needs. For students who are in the transitioning stage and above, and where the literacy data reveals comprehension and phonics instruction needs to be strengthened, we will use The Fountas & Pinnell Leveled Literacy Intervention System (LLI) as a small-group supplementary literacy intervention, as published results (2009-10) demonstrate that LLI is an effective short-term intervention for struggling readers who are also classified as English Language Learners. We will also use a double dose of FUNdations in English and a double dose of Estrellita in Spanish. In Math, teachers will use End-of-Unit assessments through Engage NY to identify and target specific skills/strands to focus in on and provide small group instruction with progress monitoring. Students will also be engaged in Readers Theater and will be required to research background information on historical, social, and cultural underpinnings of the plays they'll perform so that that their performances can be enriched by these understandings. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Our program is in its second year. In our first year, we had 1 ELL Kindergarten student who scored at the Commanding level on the NYSESLAT. We will continue to offer the same supports to our ELL students in the upcoming school year. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs' are included in all school programs. They fully participate in the wonderful arts programs we offer such as Studio In A School, Music, and Spanish. At times the ENL teacher will push-in to these classes and offer the necessary support to our ELL student. The Arts teachers plan for linguistic cultural traditions (which are reflective of our families). After School enrichment programs are available to all ELLs'.. As our school grows, and we enroll more ELLs', we will offer programs that are designed specifically for the ELL population giving them first priority. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Each of our units are thematically planned to incorporate hands on experiences, field trips and connections to students lives and to the world. Throughout the year, ELLs' will be encouraged to become increasingly independent. They are encouraged to read in their native language and taught how to use the computer or IPAD to loosely translate as well as use dictionaries and thesauruses in order to grow linguistically. When possible, books in both English and Native languages are used. For example, some children's books are printed in both Spanish and English, allowing a child to access from two languages. In other instances it makes most sense to follow a program (LLI) to ensure that students are gaining appropriate sight words and comprehension. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? We only have the stand-alone ENL Program and we attempt to provide books in the home language of the student. We also utilize internet resources. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. We have 3 periods of push in so that the work that is done corresponds to the grade level. We modify instruction so that it's aligned with the child's speaking level. In order to make sure all required support and services correspond to our ELLs' grade level, many groupings are based by grade. All of the teachers are very familiar with the Common Core Standards on their grade and their instruction is CCS aligned. Although we have high standards for all students, we know that it is important to differentiate so that all students have access. We use UDL to ensure that this happens. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? 5  Each of our units are thematically planned to incorporate hands on experiences, field trips and connections to students lives and to the world. Throught the year, ELLs' will be encouraged to become increasingly independent. They are encouraged to read in their native language and taught how to use the computer or IPAD to loosely translate as well as use dictionaries and thesauruses in order to grow linguistically. When possible, books in both English and Native languages are used. For example, some children's books are printed in both Spanish and English, allowing the child to access from two languages. In other instances it makes most sense to follow a program (LLI) to ensure that students are gaining appropriate sight words and comprehension. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). ALL of our new families (students), ELLs' included, are invited to participate in all activities offered by our staff (parent coordinator and school counselor). As our school grows, and we enroll more ELLs', we plan on implementing buddy systems for former ELL students and newcomers that will enable former students to support the newer students in their home language. In the future we would also like to hold an international breakfast annually in order to connect newer families to families that have transitioned previously. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Every other Monday we have Professional Development time for all staff including ELL personnel. We also provide additional professional development offered by our Teachers College staff developer Cheryl Tyler. During Professional Development time we review the strategies and interventions that we have, with our special needs students and ELL students in mind. Staff is taught to break down or modify instruction and to work at the ELL student's level. The ENL teacher uses the tools in the classroom to make sure the content is engaging and is taught at their level. Our ELL teacher participates in Monday PD's that are focused on literacy, including meeting the needs of ELL students. There are different cycles of PD that are customized based on the needs of the teachers in that group. Much of our Monday PD time focuses on differentiating teaching to help our students meet the CCLS. For example, teachers will engage in a 6-session math inquiry cycle focused on differentiation to meet the needs of the children who struggle in mathematics, including ELL students. Our teachers are required to incorporate the CCLSs into all lessons. Additionally, we provide Teachers College professional development to all our staff including ELL personnel. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 6  N/A at this time. However, in the future ELLs who continue to need support will be in a small RTI group in 5th grade with a Reading Teacher who will help them develop the skills and strategies they'll need to be independent learners in middle school. In addition, our OT will work with 5th graders on developing organizational skills. We have TC Professional Development regularly and abide by the requirements for ENL teachers. We file agendas and attendance sheets that were signed by the staff in attendance at all PD's, and keep them on file. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The mandated Orientation is held and we meet in person after the report card periods. We are available to the ELL family anytime they have questions or concerns. In order to keep parents abreast of the child's learning, they are invited to curriculum conferences with the ENL teacher. As our school grows, and we enroll more ELLs, we plan to hold international parent meetings that will take place quarterly, to discuss school related issues. The ENL teacher is available by e-mail and throughout the year will meet with parents to continue to support the families with ideas for home language support and/or enrichment activities in the surrounding areas. In addition, teachers will schedule individual meetings with each ELL family to which the ELL teacher and any RTI teachers involved are invited. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. All of our parents are members of the PTA and are included and encouraged to be involved at our school. We have school potlucks (one in the fall and one at the end of the school year) and many friendraisers such as ice skating parties, throughout the year. The Parent Coordinator and the head of the PTA schedule and develop different volunteer opportunities for parents as well. Teachers also allow parents the opportunities to volunteer in the classroom. Our "Family Fridays", scheduled the first Friday of every month, are a wonderful opportunity for parents of ELLs' to gain a better understanding of what is happening in the classroom. During these times, parents come into the classrooms to do an activity with the students, which might be reading, social studies, playing math games, doing art together, etc. Our Parent Coordinator, Mariateresa Bazzi, is available to meet with parents as needed, and is knowledgeable about how to access translation services. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. --- 7 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, W Elizabeth Garraway, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 8  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Maurice Sendak Community Schoo School DBN: 15K118 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) W. Elizabeth Garraway Principal Beth Handman Assistant Principal Mariateresa Bazzi Parent Coordinator Heidi Sauberg ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Maria Masourides/K grade Teacher/Subject Area Laura Willeford/3rd grade Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Eileen Tsuji Anita Skop Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 9  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 15k118 School Name: The Superintendent: Anita Skop The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. As part of our registration package, we provide families with an HLIS, emergency cards and a school information survey designed to garner as much information as we can about our students. We carefully look at the information in order to determine what language parents would like to receive school information and communication. We also do an interview with the family. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 0 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language All of our parents prefer that both written and oral communication be in English. We have one student whose home language is Hebrew. However, both parents speak fluent English. In our three years as a school we have not yet received a request to have documents or communication in a language other than English. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We are a new school in its third year of existence. We have had very few ELL students. None of our families has ever asked us to provide documentation in their native language. They all prefer to read and communicate in English. If any parents request translation we would translate newsletters, calendars, announcements and after-school program information. 1  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? We have two parent teacher conferences every year. These conferences are in November and in March. We also have two curriculum nights every year. These nights are in September and June. We also have monthly celebrations for each grade. Our guidance counselor or parent coordinator calls or interacts with families when students are in need of social emotional support and to support families in many other ways. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We will provide families with a Parents' Bill of Rights. We will have a one-one orientation with families whose native language is not English to determine what their translation and interpretation needs are. We will make sure that all report cards, narratives, common core standards, codes of discipline, information on IEPs and other special education documents are translated. 2  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will have an exit survey and a one-one interview each semester to garner feed-back from our parents. We will make improvements based on the surveys. 3 
