2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 14K126 School Name: JOHN ERICSSON MIDDLE SCHOOL 126 Principal: MARIA ORTEGA 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information John Ericsson 331400010126 6,7,8 School Number (DBN): 14K126 424 Leonard Street Brooklyn, NY 11222 718 782-2527 718 302-2319 Phone Number: Maria Ortega Fax: Mortega2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Maria Ortega Sergio Zamora EwaPirog Email Address: Parents’ Association President: Margaret Brumskine-Ricks SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Ebony Washington St. Nicks Alliance District Information Geographical District: 14 Alicja Winnicki Superintendent: 215 Heyward Street, Brooklyn, NY, 11206 Superintendent’s Office Address: awinnic@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 302-7641 Phone Number: 718 302-7978 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Brooklyn North FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Bernadette Fitzgerald Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street Rm 501 Brooklyn, NY 11201 Bfitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-3954 Phone Number: 718 935-4314 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Maria Ortega Sergio Zamora EwaPirog Ebony Washington *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Margaret Brumskine-Ricks DariuszBlaszczak SLT Chairperson /Teacher SLT Member/Teacher 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Steven House Rosa Yunes Jennifer Morales IvonneRivera SLT Member/Teacher SLT Member/Parent SLT Member/Parent SLT Member/Parent SLTMember/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: SCEP Overview Mission Statement - Our mission is to ensure that every student develops the critical thinking and self assessment skills necessary to build a strong academic and social foundation that will allow for a smooth transition to high school, college and career readiness. This will also allow them to be responsible citizens who can manage future global challenges. The three sets of values that guide all of our practices are perseverance, achievement, and citizenship. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The John Ericsson Magnet School for Environmental Engineering is located in the vibrant community of the Green point section of Brooklyn, New York. It is a Magnet School that focuses on environmental issues regarding conservation and ecology that began in 2015 and continues today with the incorporation of studies in environmental engineering, and the full implementation of the guide-lines for Eco-schools. They continue to work with the International Science Team, and Robotics (NAO) programs. MS 126 serves a diverse student population in grades six through eight which includes 68% Hispanic or Latino students, 20% Black or African American students, 11% White students, and 1% Asian students. Our school composition is made up of 28% special education students, 9% limited English proficient students, 73% consist of Title 1 population, 73% free or reduced lunch recipients with a 93% attendance rate. In school year 2016-17, our student enrollment increased from 320 to 389 students and in school year 2017-18 student enrollment is currently at 398. MS 126 is a school that engages in many collaborations and partnerships with several outstanding organizations. We currently use a research-based school improvement model connected to the Community in Schools approach. In partnership with the Community Organizations on our campus we provide three layers of tiered support to our school community. The three layers of tiered support are as follows: 1. School-wide programs aimed at preventing 75% of the students from developing any of the Attendance, Behavior and Course performance (A.B.C.) indicators. These programs are being delivered in a centralized manner with all stakeholders within our school. This model requires all extended day programs in our building which are provided to J.E.M.S. Community students to incorporate academic intervention for all students which includes homework assistance by our Community and academic intervention by our staff two days a week. 2. Target Intervention for those who develop any of the indicators despite school-wide prevention efforts. 3. Provide intensive efforts involving Specialists (Counselors, Social Workers and Teachers) for the 5% to 10% of the students who do not respond to other supports. Our partners include:  Middle School Quality Initiative: MSQI will establish a structure for strategic reading interventions , vocabulary acquisition and reading assessment tracking using the Degrees of Reading Power (D.R.P.) within both general education and special education classes to promote reading on or above grade level for all students. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11   Community in Schools: Communities in Schools monitors students to show improvement in academic achievement, attendance, behavior and promotion by honing in on and addressing social and emotional needs.  The Leader in Me Program: This program promotes the building and retention of Leadership skills for all stakeholders in our building.The program targets all aspects of a students' needs academic, emotional and physical to promote leadership abilities in all students. The program targets the administrators, teachers, students and parents.  The International Institute for Restorative Practices (I.I.R.P.) : I.I.R.P. provides a comprehensive two-year school implementation program using a pro-active approach to whole-school climate change based on communication and responsibility. I.I.R.P. assisted the school leadership team and staff to develop a customized plan based on J.E.M.S. needs and goals, organized professional learning groups (P.L.G.), provided on-site professional development and assisted the staff with evaluation of the program.  Teaching Matter ( T.M.)-The partnership with Teaching Matters (T.M.), provides effective teacher training and school turn-around strategies through the use of a 21 st. Common Core Learning Standards (C.C.L.S. ) grant. T.M. provides support in the following areas to teacher teams: o Collaboration by teachers in an inquiry-based approach using the C.C.L.S. aligned with the curricula o Implement and reflect upon research-based instructional techniques relevant for all student populations o Sustained coaching using student outcomes and teacher effectiveness data as drivers o Professional development guiding administrators in leading and sustaining school-wide teacher capacity effort. The Environmental Engineering theme is infused across all subject areas through project-based studies of natural resources that allow students to develop the critical thinking skills needed to solve real-world environmental engineering problems. Grade level themes have been established with the focus of environmental engineering and Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts and Mathematics (STEAM). Grade 6 has the theme Innovation, grade 7 Activism and Grade 8 Globalization. The grade level themes will be infused through the content areas, talent classes, day enrichment programs, as well as after-school programs. The required class novels for English Language Arts for all grade levels are aligned with the themes for those grade level. Our partners are: Global Friendship Through Space Education US Navy/ Seaperch Solar 1 Brooklyn Tech High School – STEM Pipeline Program Eco- Schools/ National Fish and Wildlife Foundation La Casita Verde In school year 2018-2019, JEMS Community School will continue its work with the Eco-Schools: Creating a Legacy of Sustainability grant in collaboration with the Green Point elementary schools PS 31, PS 34, and PS110 to achieve environmental benefits including reduction of waste, reducing school energy, and building school gardens or projects to increase green space. Our students participate in recycling waste and collect food scraps to create compost in the schools compost machine on our campus. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  MS 126 is a school that engages in many collaborations and partnerships with several outstanding organizations. We currently use a research-based school improvement model connected to the Community in Schools approach. In partnership with Community Organizations on our campus we provide three layers of tiered support to our school community. The three layers of tiered support are as follows: 1. School-wide programs aimed at preventing 75% of the students from developing any of the Attendance, Behavior and Course performance (A.B.C.) indicators. These programs are being delivered in a centralized manner with all stakeholders within our School. This model requires all extended day programs in our building which are provided to J.E.M.S. Community students to incorporate academic intervention for all students which includes homework assistance by our Community and academic intervention by our staff two days a week. 2. Target Intervention for those who develop any of the indicators despite school-wide prevention efforts. 3. Provide intensive efforts involving Specialists (Counselors, Social Workers and Teachers) for the 5% to 10% of the students who do not respond to other supports. John Ericsson Middle School is a Community School. A community School is an innovated approach to teaching the whole child. It represents a strategic way to organize resources and share leadership so that academics, social services and supports are integrated into the fabric of schools to help them better serve the needs of families. This is all done to align resources with vision and purpose resulting in improved student learning, stronger families and healthier communities. At the heart of the matter it is our charge to create partnership between all the stakeholders who play a vital role in the education of our children. We want to increase attendance, parent and student engagement, develop our students socially and emotionally, improve their academic performances, their leadership skills, improve our school culture and ensure that families are more engaged in their children’s education. ENL students are at the following levels: Entering level 2 students, Emerging 2 students, Transition 15 students Expanging 14 students, Commanding 7 students, 40 students in total. Services for these students include but are not limited to: sound reading, ENL teacher services (push-in, pull-out), and after-school program. Students in temporary housing are provided with school supplies, at risk counseling, and tracking attendance and provide support in getting to school daily and on-time. SWD's are classification include but are not limited to emotional disabilities as well as academic disabilities. Students are placed in an environment that addresses their needs either in self-contained, ICT or provided with SETSS. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. During the last P.P.O. visits in November, 2017 and May 2018, John Ericsson Middle School made progress in all six elements of the Frameworks for Great Schools. They received an "Effective or Highly Effective" for Strong Family-Community Ties, Collaborative Teachers, Supportive Environment, Effective School Leadership and Rigorous Instructions.The key areas of focus for this year will be enhancing and building on established practices for using assessments in instructional decisions and analysis of student outcomes to make adjustment at team and classroom levels. These areas of focus connect directly to the school's mission statement and primary goal for the next few years is Rigorous Instruction from the Framework for Great Schools. In addition, we have been selected for the Leader in Me grant and Middle School Quality Initiative (MSQI) program. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 14K126 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 378 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 37 37 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 42 38 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 84.0% % Attendance Rate 79.9% % Reduced Lunch 9.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 68.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 10.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.1 3% 20% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 33.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A YES NO NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO NO NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A YES YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 37 37 93.1% 4.2% 25.9% 19.6% 1.1% 0.5% 4 20% 6.5 13.9% 41% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Yes No YES N/A N/A NO YES YSH N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Economically Disadvantaged N/A ALL STUDENTS N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed x X x X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In the November 2017 and May 2018, Principal Practice Observations (P.P.O.'s) John Ericsson's Middle School received a Highly-Effective rating for all observed quality review components. In February 2018, John Ericsson's Middle School received all Well-Developed or Proficient for all the quality review components. The findings for the P.P.O. in May 2018, listed Rigorous Instruction and Family Community Ties as areas of celebration. The May, 2018 P.P.O. stated that Unit and Lesson plans and student work displayed in the classrooms and in the hallways shows that the Administration is strategically and consistently leading the teachers in deepening their understanding of rigor to align with the C.C.L.S. In addition the Quality Review February 2018, data demonstrates growth in areas of teacher support and supervision (4.1) and curriculum (1.1) with a rating of well developed. The priority needs that will be addressed are the skills of Word Meaning, Inferencing, and Summarizing working towards the goal of improving our reading comprehension across all grades. Our 2017 NYS ELA data shows an average of 65% of our students performing below grade level and our Fall 2018 administration of the Degree of Reading Power assessment shows an average of 56% of our students reading below grade level. We will be our priority area of need using small group instruction, personalized learning platforms, explicit instruction of focus skills using school-wide strategies. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, utilizing school-wide explicit reading strategies with embedded instructional principles, 10% students will achieve a 3% growth on a B.O.Y and E.O.Y standards-based ELA assessment. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Research-based instructional programs , professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change in the data culture: Staff Developer,Instructional Coach, Teachers and Paraprofessionals September, 2018 –June, 2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Principal, Assistant Principal, Staff Developer, Director of School Renewals, District support, and BFSC support, Instructional Coach,  Continue to utilize the Danielson Framework (2000) and Rubric 2013 to measure teacher effectiveness in components 3B and 3D.Administrators and teachers will assess the lesson planning and implementation correlated to student engagement and skill mastery. The data collected in the Framework will inform the identification of differentiated strategies that supports all learners. (Throughout the school year)  Provide differentiated professional learning to teachers to ensure identification of needs related to lesson planning and strategies to differentiate instruction and foster student engagement.( At designated P.D. times and as needed)  Teachers and paraprofessionals will receive and utilize professional development on a Strategic Reading program and the use of the data reports and strategies for the program. ( At designated P.D. times and as needed)  All school leaders and teachers participate in weekly meetings across grades and content areas to review student data and make necessary adjustments and revisions for enhancing instructions so that all students are actively participating in ambitious activity to develop critical thinking skills. ( Weekly) Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need Teachers of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other September 2018 to January, 2019 Teachers, Staff Developer, Instructional Coach 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18 high-need student subgroups (e.g., lowest one-third, hold-over, overage) and Para-Professionals student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH): Teachers and paraprofessionals of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH) collaborate during planning time and during additional weekly scheduled professional learning time: Engage Student-Based Support Team in structured cycles on a six week time frame and determine the flexible student groups based on the students individual assessment data( Every 6 weeks)  Continue Data Inquiry Teams to target student subgroups and identify strategies to address student achievement gaps ( Monthly)  Promote the use of visuals, creating multiple entry  points, using sentence starters, and scaffolding. (Throughout the school year) Foster collaboration among teachers resulting in the Push-In/Pull-out model for instruction involving the Special Education Teacher Support Services (S.E.T.S.S. )and (English Language Learners) ELL teachers across the grades ( Weekly)  Build in common planning periods in the master schedule during Mondays and Tuesdays professional learning time. ( Weekly)  We will utilize UFT teacher meeting times to review and revise student Individual Educational Plans.  6 week-cycles of observations by administrators to monitor classroom progress.  Cycles of inter-visitations to observe best practice, in ELA.  Use of Sound Reading, Wilson, Rewards and STARI for foundation building activities for S.W.D. and E.L.L. students Strategies to increase parent involvement and engagement related to the data: Parents/Guardians and Students  Continue participation in the weekly scheduled time provided to teachers exclusively for parental outreach and student led conferences ( Weekly)  Coordinate an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference ( Annually)  Host four scheduled Parent-Teacher Conferences using the MSQI A.P.P.T. model and coordinate student-led conferences on an "as-needed" basis throughout the school year ( Quarterly) September, 2018 to June, 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent , coordinator, Para-Professional, Community Coordinator, and School Support Staff 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19   Encourage meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams and The Parent Association (Throughout the school year)  Provide parent training on Pupil Path, Blended Learning opportunities, Eco-Schools, and Title I Parent Committee Professional Development workshops ( Monthly and as needed)  Host Family Day events and celebrate improved performance of identified subgroups as evidenced by interim assessments, perfect attendance and honor roll (Quarterly)  Organize mid-year progress monitoring activities in January, 2018. ( Semi-Annually) N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement N/A N/A N/A How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In the Fall 2018, parent engagement for rigorous instruction will include back to school curriculum night with all teachers and administration, specialized high school meetings with the Guidance Counselor, and parent workshops using the MSQI A.P.P.T. model with our 6th grade teacher team. In Winter, parents will have walk-in Pupil Path trainings with the Parent Coordinator. In the Spring, parent workshops on student literacy strategies and Regents Prep with our teachers. We will host monthly family day activities with our Community Schools Director. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Our goal is to maximize the instructional program by strategically aligning funds so that the unique needs of our school population are met. We coordinate our fiscal and human resources beginning with a full overview of allocated funds in collaboration with our B.F.S.C. budget/human resource support team. Next, we will allocate funds needed to cover classroom instruction and coaching and administrative staff based on programming needs using Tax Levy FSF and Title 1 funds. Additionally, we access Leadership support in the use of curriculum planning programs and implementation of teacher team practices as well as: - On-site feedback given regularly by school leaders -Support in identification of research-based instructional strategies and planning teacher professional learning -Support in data access and continual on-site, job-embedded professional learning opportunities for school leaders and teachers. -Identification of parental resources 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  -Per session money for PD providers -Coverages for meetings and inter visitations for teachers -funds and bandwidth for Pupilpath -Per session money to facilitate Summer curriculum mapping and Enrichment programs -Allocate professional learning time for curriculum alignment -Data analysis time for inquiry team meetings Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 5% of students in grades 6,7, and will demonstrate a 1.5% increase in Math proficiency level , as measured by our Mid-year standards -based assessment, compared to our September 2018 standards-based baseline. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Mid-year standards -based assessment Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? We received ratings of Proficient in both areas of School Culture on the Quality Review Report in 2016-2017 including maintaining a culture of mutual trust and establishing a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff. On our 2017 School NYSED School Report Card we received a rating of 3.34 on Trust and 3.20 on Supportive Environment meeting standards on School Culture. Specifically in the Supportive Environment category 56% of students say that teachers support them when they are upset and in the Trust category 84% of students say that teachers treat them with respect. Our attendance data shows 92% of students were present daily as compared to the city average of 94%. The school leader has put in place SMART goals that address the priorities outlined in the S/C.E.P. These goals were supported by the entire school community and were designed to bring about improvements in planning, instruction, and students’ social and emotional developmental health, and strengthen school-family relationships. Our priority need will be increasing our ratings in Supportive Environment by providing students with voice, choice and empowerment. The recommendation is to reflect on the school survey results, continue our efforts to promote 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  meaningful voice of all stakeholders, including students, in school decisions and in creating a safe environment and inclusive culture with mutual trust and positive attitudes. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through implementation of Culturally Responsive Teaching and infusion of the 7 Habits of the Leader in Me Program, students will develop and practice effective leadership skills leading to 3% increase in positive responses specifically in Supportive Environment on a mid-year and end of year annual Leader in Me survey and 2 student organized leadership events. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Assistant Principals, Staff Developer, S.T.F., Data Specialist, Teachers,Instructional Coach, and Paraprofessionals Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Research-based instructional programs , professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Teachers and Students September 2018-June 2019 Four Units in E.L.A., all other subjects six weeks  Utilization of Culturally Responsive Teaching to use a brain-based teaching approach to culturally responsive instruction promoting authentic engagement and rigor among culturally and linguistically diverse students. (5.4)  Utilization of "The Leader in Me" Program and vision school-wide to teach leadership principles, create a leadership culture and align academic systems. (5.2)  Continuation of C.C.L.S. Expeditionary Learning Units, Magnet Theme, Go Math Common Core and Algebra For All program, C.C.L.S. Social Studies/Literacy, New Generation Science Standards, and the Arts (5.3)  This year, the school will implement a Student leadership team to represent student voice. This team will ultimately be responsible for the design, planning and management of 2 leadership events for the school year. (5.5) Students are assigned to an Advisory for direct 7 Habits instruction during the school day. (5.3)  Teachers of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH) collaborate during planning time and additional weekly scheduled professional learning time. Teachers focus on the following strategies: Teachers, Paraprofessionals From September,2018to June, 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Staff Developer, STF, Teachers, and Paraprofessionals 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  Questioning to promote critical thinking and discussion  Utilizing visuals and graphic organizers to enhance learning  Creating multiple entry points for student engagement  Co-Planning with colleagues, utilizing Learning Walks.  Thorough data analysis and looking at student work Engaging families and expanding their understanding of a supportive environment in order to support their children at home Parent/ Guardians, and Students From September,2018 to June, 2019  6th grade orientation/acclimation   Introduction to N.Y.C. Schools Accounts Four Parent Conferences – September, November, February, May  Open house presentation for all parents/guardians.  Progress reports sent home.  Regularly scheduled outreach from teachers to parents/guardians using Pupil Path and in-person meetings Student Led Conferences   An open door policy for parents’ visitation to the school  Academic & Holiday celebrations for parents/guardians, teachers and Community members  Numerous open house events  Family Literacy and Educational workshops Engaging families and supporting their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core in order to support their children at home :  Familiarize students with their performance data and progress through participation in small intervention groups (As needed) Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers, Staff Developer, Paraprofessionals, Parent & Community Coordinators, S.T.F. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  Utilize Pupil Path for parents and students to be informed about levels, progress, and next steps ( Daily)  Maintain an open-door policy for all staff and families that allows for reciprocal communication, problem-solving, and respect for every one's perspective. (Daily) Facilitate the sharing of school community events that celebrate the success of our children ( Throughout the school year)   Produce a monthly calendar that articulates scheduled events that encourage the participation of all stakeholders ( Monthly)  Title 1 Common Core aligned workshops in all subject areas ( At designated P.D. times) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. During the 2018-2019 school year, parent/families will be engaged using family newsletters , bi-monthly family surveys through the Parent Teacher Association meetings, Leader in Me family surveys and Student-Led conference surveys bi-annually given by administration,7H family trainings held bi-annually as needed by the Leader in Me coordinator, and student led leadership events. The newsletter will be developed by the Parent Coordinator and Guidance Counselor, and distributed quarterly to the entire school community. The 7H Family Trainings will be lead by the Leader in Me Coordinator, and including student lead events in the winter of 2019. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Our goal is to maximize the instructional program by strategically aligning funds so that the unique needs of our school population are met. We coordinate our fiscal and human resources beginning with a full overview of allocated funds in collaboration with our Borough budget specialist through the purchase of : laptops/Ipads supplies to support the workshop model (notebooks, paper)    non-fiction text  per-session to support teachers to create plans   professional development days for teachers funding of substitute teachers. instructional consultant days Additionally, we access Leadership support in the use of curriculum planning programs and implementation of teacher team practices as well as: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  - On-site feedback given regularly to school leaders and teachers -Support in identification of research-based instructional strategies and planning teacher professional learning -Support in data access and continual for on-site, job-embedded opportunities for school leaders and teachers. -Identification of parental resources. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In January 2019, the Culture Coordinator, Staff Developer and the data analysis team will review the Leader in Me mid-year survey results to determine a 1% growth in the Supportive Environment category for the school year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress Monitoring will be assessed using the Leader in Me Surveys. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by SOP(s) Addressed X X X X using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school’s strengths relative to the Capacity Framework element of Collaborative Teachers lies in the intrinsic motivation of each J.E.M. Community School 126 faculty and staff member to work together to build structures and provide supports that will ensure the success of our students. According to the recommendations provided by the last Principal Performance Observation (P.P.O.) visit of May, 2018, this area is well-developed. We received a rating of Proficient in the area of Systems for Improvement on the Quality Review Report in 2016-2017 specifically engaging in structured professional collaboration on teacher teams. On our 2017 School NYSED School Report Card we received a rating of 4.07 on Collaborative Teachers exceeding standards on School Culture. Specifically in the Collaborative Teacher category, 84% of teachers say that they have opportunities to work productively with colleagues in their school and 91% of teachers say that teachers feel responsible that all students learn. Our P.P.R data shows a well-developed in the area of 4.2- Teacher Teams. . The school leader has put in place SMART goals that address the priorities outlined in the S/C.E.P. These goals were supported by the entire school community and were 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  designed to bring about improvements in planning, instruction, and students’ social and emotional developmental health, and strengthen school-family relationships. Our priority need will be increasing our ratings in 4.2 Collaboration by providing teachers with more opportunities team planning, inter-visitations and integration of new staff. The recommendation is to reflect on the school survey results, continue our efforts to promote meaningful voice of all stakeholders, including students, in school decisions and in creating a safe environment and inclusive culture with mutual trust and positive attitudes. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teacher teams across content areas will collaboratively plan, participate in professional development and inter-visitations to implement a Strategic Reading intervention program resulting in a five point increase in the average school-wide score on the Spring D.R.P. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers and Staff Developer September, 2018 to June, 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Staff Developer, District support, and B.F.S.C. support Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Research, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change:  Utilize the Danielson Framework for Teaching (2013) to measure teacher effectiveness and provide timely feedback, during cycles of observations performed by the school leaders. (4.3)   School leaders have developed a timely plan for cycles of observation, feedback to teachers, and Advance Data. (4.3) School leaders call upon District for support in professional learning for school leaders and staff including on-site support and job-embedded training, monthly. (4.2)  All teachers have been trained in “IO Assessment" an online program which ensures that a data system to track the progress of all students is in place to guide student needs and keep parents informed. (4.5)  The administrative team will schedule time during teacher teams, (P.L.C.s weekly) and departmental meetings to analyze and review data aligning rigorous instruction with Common Core Learning Standards. (4.4)  Teachers will utilize and receive professional development on the following Interventions: Wilson, Just Words, Sound Reading, STARI, Achieve 3000, MYon, Independent Reading and Enrichment. (4.2)  All school leaders and teachers participate in weekly schedule professional development. (4.2)  Teachers will observe best practice of teaching reading strategies through inter-visitations. (4.4) Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, Teachers and Staff Developer September, 2018 to June, 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Staff Developer, District support, and BFSC support 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  The school will use the following instructional strategies in all classrooms to support the needs of all learners in all subgroups:  S.E.T.S.S. teacher will push into major subject areas to re-teach and support I.E.P. students in general education classes.(4.2)  The E.L.L. teacher will target the E.N.L. students in the general education classroom and filtering vocabulary, providing visuals, clarify language, provide sentence starters, and graphic organizers to match the rigor of the C.C.L.S. lessons. (4.5)  Most I.E.P. and ENL students are placed in Integrated Co-Teaching classes. The general and special education teachers meet at least once a week during a scheduled common prep to ensure teaching practices and supports are aligned to assist students in these subgroups.(4.2)  All teachers in our school have access to the curriculum which is on Rubicon to revise and modify lessons for all grade levels and all subjects. (4.2)  Teachers use data to revise and modify lessons to accommodate the needs of these subgroups.(4.2)  Create and implement a differentiated professional learning plan based on the N.Y.C. Chancellor’s Professional Learning Handbook (2014) (4.3) Strategies to increase parent involvement and engagement  Faculty, Staff, P.T.A., and our Community Partners will collaborate to implement monthly workshops to provide parents with the tools (training & information) necessary to support student achievement at home.  C.C.L.S. Literacy standards and skills; how to use our Skedula/Pupil Path IO Assessment system to track student progress and communicate with teachers; how to access a variety of resources to support student achievement at home; ELL/ESL specific topics and resources.  Teachers continue to engage in regular communication to families through the use of our Skedula/Pupil Path IO Assessment system and phone calls. Teachers will track all communication in the IO Assessment system. Parents/ Guardians and Students September, 2018 to June, 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Staff, CBOs, and District Support 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Parent Coordinator and PTA President will engage in timely outreach to ensure that all families are aware of the monthly PTA and CEC meetings and feel welcome to attend 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will participate in MYON competitions hosted by our Technology and ELA Teachers, MSQI Family Night and Literacy Night implemented by our Community Schools Director, Family spelling bee coordinated by our Staff Developer, and DEAR (Drop Everything and Read) at home from October 2018-June 2019. Parents will also participate in Student Lead Conference 3x during the school year 2018-2019. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Title 1 funding and SIG Grants will be used to provide teachers with professional development in curriculum mapping, using the Danielson Rubric for Teaching 2013 in their unit and lesson plans, and analyzing MOSL and other assessment data to derive curriculum and instructional decision-making. Professional development sessions are provided on Mondays and Tuesdays for teachers and paraprofessionals by Leader in Me Certified trainers, MSQI coaches, and need specific consultants. Additional learning opportunities are available throughout the school year. Professional development will be based primarily on the "Data Coach's Guide" by Love et.al and " The Reading-Writing Connection" by John Langan. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In January, 2019 teacher teams will analyze the Winter D.R.P. results to ascertain if students have made a 2% improvement from the Fall D.R.P. to measure progress towards the goal of 5% growth on the Spring D.R.P. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Analyzing student growth of 2 % on the DRP from the Fall to Winter mid-year benchmark. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). x x x X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school received a 4.01 in Effective School Leadership exceeding standards. Specifically, 93% of parents feel that the principal works to create a sense of community in the school. However only 84% of teachers say that they trust each other that they trust the principal. This year we have created a TRUST Committee that is focused on increasing the relationships between teacher to teacher and teacher to school leaders. . The School Leaders and teacher teams will meet to examine and create a plan for how to work together to realize our long- term vision. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all school stakeholders, including parents will engage in team-building activities and professional development facilitated by leadership teams to increase mutual trust reflected in 2019 Student Perception Survey and on the Trust score on the Learning Environment Survey. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) September, 2018 to June, 2019 Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Staff Developer, Principal and Assistant Principals Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Research-based instructional programs , professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change School Community  The leadership team will develop surveys to monitor the trust factor throughout the school year. (2.5)  The school community will engage in team-building activities during professional development and school community events. (2.3)  The school community will collaboratively develop  suggested teacher tools for positive reinforcement.(2.5) Leadership teams will develop student surveys to assess student voice for Teacher Expectations in the Fall and Winter and Spring Reflections on Learning Environments. (2.2)  We will develop a TRUST Committee to monitor the progress of trust within the school community towards our goal. (2.3)  Professional development will be facilitated by leadership teams for 6 week cycles of new initiatives such as Strategic Reading, Culturally Responsive Teaching, and Empowering Young Writers. Upon completion of the initial workshop cycles, staff will be surveyed for the continuation of differentiated professional development. (2.3)  Teachers meet with the Principal and Assistant Principals to  develop goals and discuss their individualized professional learning plan.(2.2) School leaders have developed a timely plan for cycles of observation and feedback to teachers on data driven instruction.(2.3) Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). School Community September, 2018 to June, 2019  The leadership team will develop surveys to monitor the trust factor throughout the school year. (2.3) Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Staff Developer, Principal and Assistant Principals 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  The school community will engage in team-building activities during professional development and school community events.  The school community will collaboratively develop  suggested teacher tools for positive reinforcement.(2.3) Leadership teams will develop student surveys to assess student voice for Teacher Expectations in the Fall and Winter and Spring Reflections on Learning Environments. (2.3)  We will develop a TRUST Committee to monitor the progress of trust within the school community towards our goal. (2.3)  Professional development will be facilitated by leadership teams for 6 week cycles of new initiatives such as Strategic Reading, Culturally Responsive Teaching, and Empowering Young Writers. Upon completion of the initial workshop cycles, staff will be surveyed for the continuation of differentiated professional development. (2.3)  Teachers meet with the Principal and Assistant Principals to  develop goals and discuss their individualized professional learning plan.(2.2) School leaders have developed a timely plan for cycles of observation and feedback to teachers on data driven instruction.(2.3) Strategies to increase parent involvement and engagement  Hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year on how to use Skedula.(2.3)  Encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association  Establish a Parent Resource Center, Lending library, and instructional materials for parents to familiarize themselves with the use of student data (2.3)  Encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers(2.5)  Provide written and verbal data driven progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informing them of their child’s progress (2.3) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Parents, Guardians and students September, 2018 to June, 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers, Community Coordinator, and Parent Coordinator 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent will be active members of the SLT team, as well as open meetings inviting all community members. School leaders are present at all PTA meetings providing Principals report of current school issues in addition to sharing school vision and mission. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. FSF and Title 1 funding will be used to staff instructional school leaders and Staff Developer to provide feedback on classroom instruction. Teachers will be provided with assistance from educational consultants in learning how to analyze student work products and related teacher practices to improve their pedagogy based on "Using Data to Improve Learning For All" by Nancy Love during the common daily planning period. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, as a result of the school leaders' effective professional support for teachers, there will increase by 3% from 88% to 91% in 2018, positive responses by teachers related to questions and prompts about trust, as measured by a school-created community survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Administration of a School created survey in line with NYC Learning Environment Survey. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We received an overall rating of 3.74 in the category of Strong Family- Community Ties. Specifically, 93% of parents say that they have communicated with their child's teacher about their child's performance and 94% of parents say that school staff regularly communicate with them about how parents can help their child learn. We have a plan in place that will guide us in moving towards 4.0 in this category. There are systems in place at MS 126 to support our families with our community partners. This year we have created a school-wide priority for all students and their families to be aware of the school-wide expectations and plan pertaining to graduating. Our in house community partner: Communities in Schools will set up one to one conversation (Report Card Conferences) with our students once they receive their first marking period report cards. “Comunilife” is a community based organization that will begin working with us on cases of suicide ideation for female students. Their support will be essential in helping our students and parents on such a difficult issues. Our Parent coordinator will set up professional development for parents to easily navigate our online grading system, SKEDULA/Pupil Path an online computer program. We will empower families through continuous professional development on data analysis to support student success. Additionally, we will collaborate with the In-house Beacon Program and the District to provide parents with professional development on the C.C.L.S. and the graduation process to support student success. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  Specifically, we are planning and implementing more opportunities for training to enable families and staff to support the social and academic development of students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 6th grade teacher teams will participate in the MSQI Academic Parent Teacher Teams to provide 3 parent workshops focused on literacy strategies to support academic growth in the D.R.P. and build family capacity to support student learning and achievement. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Parents, Guardians, and Students September, 2018 to June, 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers, School Counselors, Parent Coordinator, and C.B.O.s Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Research-based instructional programs , professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change  A.P.T.T. will assist families in learning grade-level concepts, student performance data and increase family and teacher communication and collaboration.(6.5)  A.P.T.T will supplement opportunities for teachers and families to collaborate(6.5)  These teams will also create systematic pathways for teachers to share grade-level information, tools, and strategies that can be easily applied at home. (6.4)  Parent Coordinator responsible for engaging families with our community support organizations to provide them with the necessary skills and knowledge to address their educational and family needs.(6.3) Success Mentors will be assigned to each student in need to foster positive relationships and accountability partners. (6.4)  Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers, School Counselors, Parent Coordinator, C.B.O.s Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH Parents, Guardians and Students September, 2018 to June, 2019  We have Special Education Teacher Support Services (S.E.T.S.S.) English as a New Language Teachers (E.N.L) and Integrated Collaborative Teaching (I.C.T.) teachers following a Push-in model to better serve our students in these subgroups. This enables the teachers to have a more comprehensive view of these subgroups and be able to speak to the parents in collaboration with the general and special education teachers and community based organizations.  The school ensures parents of students in these subgroups are aware of all student performance data and reading strategies. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40 Parents, Guardians and Students September, 2018 to June, 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers, School Counselors, Parent Coordinator, CBOs  Furthermore, the school leader in collaboration with the School Leadership Team and the Parent’s Association will continue to seek ways to improve the partnership between the school and home through professional development scheduled regularly for parents. Strategies to increase parent involvement and engagement  We will continue to provide written and verbal student performance data that will periodically keep parents informed of their children’s progress in different languages as needed  We will develop and distribute a school monthly calendar of events designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress and upcoming professional developments  We will provide school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand  We will encourage students to join the Beacon after school program for homework help and extracurricular activities.  Translations for all documents to parents will be provided by the school as needed or requested. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Families will work with St. Nicks Alliance Organization and Community Schools forum for attendance, behavior, and coursework. High School and College Access for All partnerships, Partnership with Children activities promoting mental health services, housing, and workforce. Power Brain and Ramapo for Children will host parent workshops for student social-emotional development. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The school leader, School Leadership Team (S.L.T.), and the parent coordinator will establish partnerships with local community based organizations to leverage more funding and resources to support the school’s and families’ academic and social-emotional needs. Community Based Organizations will provide training and information on site for parents and students and workshops will be scheduled at various times to accommodate parents’ needs. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, the school will review attendance and lateness data to determine the percent change in student absenteeism and lateness as evident in the New Vision Data Sorter. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Analysis of student chronic absenteeism and lateness in the New Vision Data Sorter Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) English Language Arts (ELA)  Referral to SITCommittee  Review ofM.O.S.L. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Extended Learning Activities, S.E.T.S.S., and State Tests and baseline DRP. Reading Interventions.  Classroom observations  Attendance  Behavioral referrals  Referral to SITCommittee  Review ofM.O.S.L. and State Tests and baseline math assessment  Classroom observations  Attendance  Behavioral referrals  Referral to SITCommittee  Review ofM.O.S.L. andclass room observations  Attendance  Behavioral referral Wilson Program Just Word Rewards Sound Reading STARI Extended Learning Activities, S.E.T.S.S, Reading and Writing Interventions. STEM Projects Extended Learning Activities, S.E.T.S.S, Reading and Writing Interventions. STEM Projects Mathematics Science Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small groups and When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During classes, Individualized instruction After School, and Saturdays Small groups and During classes, Individualized instruction After School, and Saturdays Small groups and During classes, Individualized instruction After School, and Saturdays 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43 Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.)  Referral to S.I.T. Committee  Review ofM.O.S.L. and classroom observation  Attendance  Behavioral referral Extended Learning Activities, S.E.T.S.S., Reading and Writing Interventions. Small groups and During classes, Individualized instruction After School, and Saturdays  Referral to S.I.T. Committee and teacher and or provider observations.  The classroom At-Risk counseling Small groups and During School Day Individualized Counseling. teacher or a service provided may request intervention from the Pupil Personnel Committee based upon his/her experience with the child and observation of academic/behavioral performance, health needs, attendance/lateness patterns or knowledge of family issues. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 20 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students will be provided with school supplies, uniforms, books, glasses, dental and non incidental for eg: funds for school trips. In addition STH will be provided with guidance services funded through SIG including family support through the CBO, and academic intervention services when needed. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. All teachers will provide instruction in ELA and Math in their certified licensed areas during the Extended Learning Time Programs and Saturday programs. Teachers will be given continual professional development on The Danielson Framework, creating effective CCLS-aligned lesson plans, questioning and discussion techniques, and time management strategies. Team Leaders will attend teacher leadership workshops to learn and share best practices in the school community. The school leadership will conduct monthly meetings with the new teachers to provide support and build capacity in Danielson’s Framework for Teaching. Additional workshops will be provided for non-tenured teachers.The strategies for recruitment will consist of teachers serving as members of the hiring committee. Teachers will be promoted from within the building to serve on committees and Leadership roles to promoted a sense of community and belonging. Teachers will be encouraged to teach on different grade levels as long as they have the relevant certification. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). The school leadership will be directly supported by the District and Borough Field Support and will attend professional development sessions. Teachers will be offered professional development on-site, off site, including one-to-one coaching in their classrooms. They will also receive training for implementation of technological resources. Professional development will also be provided on Restorative Practices (Bob Costello, 2009) to all staff members to address the social and emotional needs of all students. The P.L.C. model will be utilized to train all staff members in the implementation of the Restorative Practices program. The new teachers' contract sets aside time in the work day, Mondays and Tuesdays, for engaging in professional development. We have seized this new opportunity to design meaningful professional development that meets the needs of individual teachers and the school as a whole. We realize that quality professional development is something that genuinely addresses the needs of each school and reflects the interests of each school's staff. We feel that professional development is most effective when it is deeply relevant to the work teachers do daily. Paraprofessionals and other support staff will receive specific training led by the Special Education Coordinator bi-weekly. These trainings will consist of role clarifications, educational toolkits and co-planning strategies. These 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  sessions will be held semi-monthly. The principal will receive professional development from MSQI, Leader in ME, Algebra for All and the Model Cohort. These professional developments opportunities represent the vision of an ongoing sustained professional learning community. This year for example, professional development includes work from the C.C.L.S. curriculum mapping, Teacher’s College Writing workshops, Leader in Me program, Danielson Framework for Teaching, higher order questioning and differentiation of instructions. We feel that true teacher improvement happens only when trust and collaboration are at its core. Our instructional Leaders and teachers reflect on professional practice, work collaboratively , and share ideas and practices as they strive to improve student outcomes every day. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). "NA" 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teacher Leaders, Teacher teams and the M.O.S.L. team work collaboratively to determine the selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the Professional Learning Committee in collaboration with administration, staff developer, and classroom teachers provide professional development regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction using the D.R.P., Math benchmark and student work analysis data. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5E Section 5C Section 5B Section 5B Section 5A 0 Section 5D Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 278,685 16,979 2,931 12,386 12,366 0 3,092,516 X X X X X 0 X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49   Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG or SIF funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. John Ericsson Middle School 126, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students John Ericsson Middle School 126 will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  School-Parent Compact (SPC) John Ericsson Middle School 126, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum  Providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56 ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? Early morning activities are available to students through clubs, physical activities, and debate. Attendance at these activities are rewarded with incentives. These programs increase attendance and decrease chronic absenteeism by 3%. These courses are increasing accelerated coursework.These programs while open to every student in the school community are intentionally geared towards students who exhibited poor attendance and in turn poor academic achievement. By engaging these students and getting them to increase their attendance we are able to get them motivated in class performance. A decrease in absenteeism and lateness directly impacts student performance. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019through the merit system under the Leader in Me Program, there will be a decrease in chronic absenteeism, and lateness by 3%. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? Through the incentive merit programs of Leader in Me attendance will increase and chronic absenteeism will decrease. As a result academic goals for all students academically will increase. Summer programs are available for incoming 6th graders and 7 and 8 graders to set the stage for the upcoming academic year. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  St. Nick's Alliance St. Nick's Alliance Success Mentors Greenpoint Beacon Afterschool Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Incoming 6th graders with attendance issues Attendance Support Decrease chronic absenteeism 3%. School community health and wellness School community School community Attendance support Academic support June 2019 there would be a 5% increase of students who are enrolled in the dental and vision screening programs. Decrease chronic absenteeism 3% Increase ELA scores in line with 18-19 goals Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. St.Nick’s is our lead CBO. Our CSd works with the beacon and other services provided by St.Nicks to ensure that the needs of our community are met. These needs range from housing, immigration services,college readiness, job readiness for adults and teens, and ESL services. Our ELT is a three tiered approach, we see it as enrichment, remedial and . All students are placed into cohorts depending on the individual needs and assessment. Once these groups are created they are offered a menu of options for their ELT hours. Our teachers work alongside our After school staff in developing and providing the curriculum for ELT. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work.The school leadership has weekly regular standing meeting. This consists of the principal, the 2 Assistant Principals, the Community School Director, and the Lead Guidance Counselor. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  2. 3. 4. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. Our school has an open door policy for stakeholders. Our Community School meetings are open to the public and are advertised. We welcome anyone joining us. We communicate with our stakeholders using various methods including email, phone calls, flyers and newsletters. The School Principal meets on a weekly basis with the Community School Director, Assistant Principals, guidance counselors, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter. Through this meeting and analyzing data students are provided with services needed to increase their academic performance. We believe in every stakeholder having a voice in the structure of our school community, the partnership between the CBO and the school is one that is based on putting the best interest of our stakeholders first. School leaders and the CBO work in unison to create systems to execute this plan. Led by the decisions made during Community School Leadership Team meetings along with the school Cabinet meeting, the entire school community is well informed and up to date on what is happening in the school. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 1. St. Nicks Alliance provides comprehensive after-school programs for our middle school students. Our after-school program operate Monday through Friday until 6 p.m. During these hours our student get academic enrichment, Socio-emotional learning as well as recreational opportunities. 2. Partnership with Children will continue to be our mental health provider and support our school community using their theory of change model. Partnership with Children supports the well-being of New York City public school students. As a result, students are successful, families are involved, teachers are more effective, and schools are supportive. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  4. Sports &Arts will continue to provide College access for all services for our students. By actively engaging our middle school students with college assess we will promote a college going culture within our school community. The Community School Team consist of the principal, the CSD, the parent coordinator, the guidance counselors, directors of the after school programs, members of the PTA, this team ensures that we have a voice and representation from all of our stakeholders. The New Visions data sorter is an integral part of our planning process. We use it in our attendance meetings as well as school climate meeting as a reference for planning and constructing interventions for our students. As a result of this information we were able to create attendance improvement programs such as our VIP lounge and attendance improvement clubs. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. We are fortunate to have a very diverse and dedicated staff. Our teachers along with our CBO provides us with the human capital needed to accomplish our goals. Target instruction is provided during winter and spring break and funded by tax levy. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. The early morning programs began on October 2, 2018. Our ELT will begin once the assessments are completed. We expect to start in September to provide support for our 8th graders taking the specialized high school exams. ELT and clubs run until the end of May. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 2 2 0 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: We have two ENL certified teachers who work with our ELL population to support their language acquisition needs. Instruction is delivered in a Stand Alone ENL program and Integrated ENL. The program has students grouped heterogeneously in a block schedule, traveling with general education classes. ENL teachers are programmed with the ELA teachers in an integrated ENL model, while also servicing our entering and emerging students through Stand Alone ENL. Our school uses Myon reader and Degrees of Reading Power to assess independent lexile levels. A student's second language development is addressed in all content area and grade level meetings, where an ENL teacher working with the student(s) is always present. ELL student data is shared with all staff through Skedula and Common planning meetings. The targeted intervention programs for ENLs with special needs receive instruction in English. The content areas of ELA (integrating science & social studies) include the following intervention programs: Wilson (Foundations); Technology (myON and I- LIT) and RTI (AIS). ELL students are grouped by NYSESLAT/ NYSITELL levels and individualized planning to support the reading, listening speaking and writing components of the NYSESLAT Exam. All teachers have access to Rubicon, our online teacher created curriculum. Teachers can always access all general education lessons and activities in order to differentiate instruction. ENL students will also take part in our school wide initiative programs like The Leader in Me and Middle School Quality Initiative to build their language and communication skills. ENL teachers also use Bloom's Taxonomy and Depth of Knowledge (DOK) to distinguishing the fundamental questions for higher order thinking. The ENL Department and members of the administration team have reviewed NYSESLAT data and the Title III AMAO (Annual Measurable Achievement Objectives) Tool with Advanced Early Warning Indicators and have determined that the following interventions are needed: Saturday Instructional Academy: We will offer a 15-week ENL Saturday Instructional Academy from 9:00 am- 12:00 pm, open to all of our ENL students grades six to eight, but particularly targeting our Entering, Emerging and Transitional ENL students. There will be one group of students consisting of Entering students grade 6 - 2 students, grade 7-3 students, grade 8 - 1 student. Emerging students grade 6 - 2 students, grade 7 - 2 students. and transitional grade 6 - 4 students, grade 7 - 5 students and grade 8 - 3 students for a total of 22 students. Instruction will be given in English with supporting resources in their native language. The program will begin on October 15th, 2018 and run through June 3, 2019. Teachers will look at the students’ current 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information data to create lesson plans and activities. Our Saturday Academy includes three components: The certified ENL teachers will use in-house materials to support ELA and mathematics, NYSESLAT test prep resources, Myon and benchmarks to track student progress through the program. Teachers will keep records of attendance and send parents notification letters in their native language. ENL after-school program: Our two ENL teachers support our Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding and Commanding English Language Learners, grades six through eight, on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:20 pm- 4:30pm. This program is scheduled to operate from October 15, 2018 through June 3, 2019, totaling about 56 sessions for students to attend. Wednesday's have been designated for Entering, Emerging and Transitional students, while Thursday's is for Expanding and Commanding students. There will be one group of students consisting of Entering students grade 6 - 2 students, grade 7-3 students, grade 8 - 1 student. Emerging students grade 6 - 2 students, grade 7 - 2 students. and transitional grade 6 - 4 students, grade 7 - 5 students and grade 8 - 3 students for a total of 22 students. This program is designed to service 22 students on Wednesdays. Instruction is given in English. For our Entering and Emerging students we work on decoding, phonic, grammar, read aloud and Myon. Transitioning, Expanding and commanding students are given extra support in English through Myon and I-Lit which focuses on reading comprehension, writing and vocabulary development. On Thursdays, Expanding and Commanding students will be offered an opportunity to increase their reading comprehension. This group is taught by a certified ENL teacher and is available for 6-8th grade students. Sixth gr - 3 students, 7th grade - 8 students, and 8th grade - 11 students for a total of 22 students.Teachers will keep records of attendance and send parents notification letter in their native language. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Professional development opportunities for school staff will be provided with the assistance of Brooklyn North Field Service Center (BNFSC) to improve outreach, communication skills, and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of our school community. This will help teachers to contact parents of all ENL students to try to form strong relationships which will positively influence students and their families to feel as key members of the school community. Teachers will invite parents on trips with their children to help understand what their child is learning in school. After a staff member attends a workshop relating to servicing ENLs, the staff member will return to the school and turn-key the information to all personnel in the school community so we can all better support our ENL students. This will help teachers keep up to date with ENL practices. As ENLs transition from one level to another, the school provides the teachers with an opportunity to design a plan of action to support the students during the transition period. The data from NYSESLAT/NYSITELL is disseminated and collectively analyzed with all staff who work with ENLs. Our ENL teachers participate in a series of professional developments provided by our 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  Part C: Professional Development BNFSC with ENL specialists covering topics such as co-teaching for integrated ENL, working with ENLs-SWDs, schema building in the ENL classroom, and best practices working with ELLS. ENL teachers are expected to facilitate monthly turnkey sessions with our entire staff working with ENLs. Our pupil accounting secretary has had professional development concerning the identification process for potential ENLs, as well as our ENL orientation team. The Principal will send ENL teachers monthly lists of Professional Developments through The Division of English Language Learners and Student support from which they can choose. The ENL teacher will keep agendas and attendance sign -in sheets in a binder in the library. Our PD schedule for the 2018/19 school year is as follows for all staff including guidance counselors, content area teachers, administration, and coaches; PD's will be conducted by: Licensed ENL teachers – Danuta Glowacki, Stacy Falberg Principal (SAS)- Maria Ortega Assistant Principal (SAS) - Jeffrey Merced, Kimberlea Rodney Staff Developer- Doris Castilloi PCT Teacher- Luz Paternostro July 5, 2018 -ELA/ENL Curriculum writing boot camp (Dr. Alcock) September 4, 2018 - ENL Data Review (ENL teacher, coach, administration) September 16, 2018 - ELL Progress, engaging parents September 25, 2018 - NYSITELL Training October 29, 2018 -ELL Data Review: Planning for student success (content teachers/ ENL Teachers/ Coach) November 19, 2018 - Nuts and Bolts of the ENL Identification Process Title III after school ENL program: The two ENL teachers will be using a Reading Program called I- Lit. Teachers were given a professional development to learn the program and its functions. ENL Teachers will meet monthly to create program goals and expectations. Both ENL Teachers will monitor student progress. One ENL teacher keeps attendance records and agendas. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Our school supports parents and families of ENL students by providing materials and educational opportunities to help parents work with their children in improving their academics. Translations of information is done in various ways, such as letters, phone messenger and email. All critical school documents are translated into the parent’s native language and we provide interpreters during meetings and events, as needed. For example, our school has hosted 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities the following events around the curriculum and academics; Family Math Night, Family Game Night, Family Literacy Night, Family Science Night and Community School Night in collaboration with our CBO, St. Nick’s Alliance. We believe that student success is clearly influenced by parent involvement. When parents are informed about their child's education and needs, they are better able to support them at home. With this in mind, MS126 has taken various steps to include the parents of ENLs in their children's education. MS126 uses the Skedula program to record student progress and allow students, parents and teachers online access to their grades. At our regularly scheduled PTA meetings, parents are introduced to this program and provided with basic training in their native language. Similarly, parents are notified of all events, in their native language, by written communication distributed to students, Skedula/PupilPath, by automated calls, personal phone calls made by the parent coordinator, and information posted on the school website. Most events have been made available in students home languages. All ENL events are documented with sign in sheets and agendas, these notices are maintained in the community school office by our parent coordinator. As mandated, all parents of new ENLs receive an orientation to provide them with the information necessary to make informed educational choices for their child. We held a sixth grade parent orientation as an introduction to our school on May 23, 2018 from 5pm to 7pm. All parents were given a tour of the school, and provided the opportunity to meet with members of the 6th grade faculty. Translators were present. We will hold a seventh and eighth grade parent orientations on September 12, 2018 from 6pm-7:30pm. These orientations will provide parents with information concerning the high school application process as well as the activities planned for the year. Information about the various high school open houses will also be provided. Translators were present. Parents are invited to join their children in the classroom during the final hour of instruction. When parents and children come together with a teacher, the parents often learn new concepts and are able to help their children with work assigned at home. Our Saturday Instructional Academy strengthens the bond between parents, children, and the school. Due to the fact that the focus of our Saturday instructional activities is on literacy skills improvement and progress in the content areas (Science, in particular for 8th grade ELLs), as part of a culminating activity and cultural experience, there will be two planned trips. One will be to the Brooklyn Academy of Music to see a movie about Arabics in the United States and the importance of a diverse education, and the other will be to the El Museo del Barrio in Manhattan. The parents and the participating students will be invited. Costs incurred from admission fees and bus rental for these trips, additional instructional/classroom materials, and NYSESLAT test prep materials will be paid for by the Title III program funding. -In partnership with the parent coordinator, we will provide workshops in the parent’s native language on topics such as school procedures, rights and responsibilities of parents, and school and community resources; The following are scheduled topic engagement pieces for parents: -November 6, 2018- 10am- BAM will present to students and parents. -November 27, 2018 - 4:30-7:30 PM - Brooklyn North Family Night - The Power of Language Learning Workshops - December 11, 2018 - 5:30PM-7PM - ESL Student and Common Core- Ms. Kimberlea Rodney - February 26, 2019 - 5:30PM-7PM - ENL Progress Report - Mr. Jeffrey Merced - April 9, 2019 - 11AM-12:30PM - Preparing for the NYSESLAT – Ms. Stacey Falberg 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities -We will also supply parents with content area bi-lingual glossaries as a tool for parents as they support and help their child(ren) with homework. Academic assistance will be provided to parents throughout the school year. -We will also partner with Greenpoint Beacon to develop an adult ENL class to be facilitated by our parent coordinator. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 14 School Name John Ericsson MIddle School 126 Borough Brooklyn School Number 126 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Maria Ortega Coach Kimberlea Rodney ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Stacey Falberg, Danula Glowack Teacher/Subject Area Doris Castillo/ ELA Teacher/Subject Area D. Blaszczak/ SS Related-Service Provider Ms. M. Brumskine/ SETTS Superintendent Alicja Winnicki Assistant Principal Jeffrey Merced, Kimberlea Rodn Coach Amber Howes School Counselor Sergio Zamora, Eunice Caba Parent Ewa Pirog Parent Coordinator Evelyn Castillo Field Support Center Staff Member Camilla Holmes Other (Name and Title) B C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 3 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 387 Total number of ELLs 34 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 8.79% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 3 2 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? In addition to mandated standardized examinations, ELLs are assessed twice during the school year on the WRAP (Writing Reading Assessment Profile) which indicates what reading level students are on, correlated to Fountas and Pinnel leveled books. This information represents another data source which is utilized to develop an instructional plan which is designed to address the individual ELL student's needs. The date helps us identify students as beginners or advanced ELL students. The data is used to place students in proper ELL classes such as beginners or advanced classes. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We monitor student progress through school-wide assessments, common planning time for teachers to collaborate and analyze data and extended learning time ELL's program to closing the language learning gap. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of our programs for ELLs is measured by the progress shown by our ELLs in advancing in English proficiency levels, as evidenced by the NYSESLAT, as well as meeting AYP goals in our school's report card. Our ELL students success in the program is also evaluated by their scores in E.L.A., Mathematics, Science Common Core State tests. Our success is also measured in how well our ELLs and their parents are fully integrated into our school community. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The MS 126 data team will analyze the assessment results and provide ELL and ELA teacher the trends and gaps student have in their development of language. Structured within teachers program is a common planning time, where ENL teacher and ELA teacher gather to discuss individual students needs to design Specially Design Instruction for ENL in ELA classrooms. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] MS 126 uses the NYSESLAT and formative assessments to guide instruction and monitor student learning over time in order to make important educational decisions. Student needs are first identified in Tier 1, with increasingly intensive levels of support provided in Tiers 2 and 3. At-risk students, in Tier 1 and 2, are offered intensive small-group support in addition to their regular curriculum. ELL students who do not respond to intervention are given more intensive intervention through Tier 3 by increasing the frequency and duration of the intervention. We offer after school programs for extended learning opportunities through our community in schools organizations like Beacon, City Year Corp Members and Sports and Arts and MS 126 Saturday Academies where the ELL students in our school are offered specialized instructions to intervene even more intensely to guide their instructions.. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data patterns indicate that our ELLs achieve proficiency in Listening and Speaking at a more rapid pace then they do in Reading and Writing. Our Long Term ELLs (6+ years) have plateaued in Writing and Reading. A higher percentage of our 6th grade ELLs are entering with Intermediate or Advanced proficiency levels, as evidenced by the NYSESLAT 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We conduct monthly and end of semester Instructional meeting with our ELL team to discuss new strategies and adjustments to our previous plan. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  Instruction is delivered in a push-in (co-teaching) model for beginner ELLs. The program has students grouped heterogenously. The students are placed in two ELL classes, beginner and intermediatein one setting and advanced in another setting. The beginners and intermediates are usually placed in an Integrated Collaborative Team Teaching classroom with three pedagogues, one of which is an ELL teacher for the beginner classes. Advanced students are placed in a general education class with non-ELL students. Proficiency levels are separated for the ELL students in our building. However advanced ELL students are mixed with non-ELL students with mixed proficiency levels in our school. The integrated model incorporates ELL support and modifications by the ELL teacher who supplies vocabulary and prompting for the students in those classes. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not applicable c. DL program. If applicable. Not applicable 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? There are licensed ESL teachers on staff. The ESL coordinator collaborates with the administration in designing a schedule which ensures that all ELL students receive the required number of instructional minutes in ESL and ELA, as per CR Part 154. The Part V: ELL Programming instructional minutes are delivered in the context of our push in model in ELA and Math. The ELL teachers provide 360 units of study per week for beginners at 180 units for Stand Alone and 180 units for Integrated, for Intermediate 180 units of study per week at 90 units for Stand Alone and 90 units for integrated, for advanced ELL students at 180 units of Integrated study per week. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content area instruction is delivered in English, with ESL teachers serving students in a Integrated model. All teachers have been trained in Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol Model (SIOP) model, which addresses the requirement to make content comprehensible for all students, including our ELL students. Native language support is provided to all of our ELL students through the use of technology, vocabulary slides, printed visuals, laptops and electronic dictionaries. Teachers have prepared lesson materials in the students native language through the use of Google translations services. In Math and Science classes, Spanish textbooks are available for use by our Spanish speaking ELLS who are our largest ELL student population. We have dictionaries in Polish and Arabic for the next significant population in our school. We have beginners who get 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We do not currently utilize a standard evaluation for ELLs in their native language, other than SIFE screening, in which case the ALLD (Academic Language and Literacy Diagnostic) is administered in Spanish to Spanish speaking students. Similarly, the Spanish LAB is administered to all prospective Spanish speaking ELLs, in addition to the LAB-R. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Differentiation at MS 126 comes in numerous forms such as instruction, environmental, technology, academic materials and other academic specialists in our schools. Newcomers to MS 126 are placed according to their proficiency levels. Newcomers are also provided with support through targeted sight words, and BICS (Second Language Acquisition Theory and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  Principles) by trained ESL teachers. We provide Academic Intervention Services for English language Learners who have been receiving services for 3 to 6 years. This group of ELLs also receives focused instruction on academic language development. Our emphasis is on improving outcomes in reading and writing on both the NYSESLAT and the ELA state tests. Our long-terms ELLs who have received more than 6 years of service, are included on our Inquiry Teams across the content areas, to the greatest extent possible. Our focus for the year 2017-2018 is twofold; to increase content knowledge through academic vocabulary and reading comprehension skills; and to provide social/emotional support for our middle schooler's, to further assist them to increase proficiency levels in reading and mathematics. Teachers are focusing on increasing vocabulary and on performance indicators tested most frequently on the state tests, during Inquiry and instructional team planning periods. To assist us in moving forward with instructional goals, we have partnered with Teaching Matters to align our curricula with the common core standards. Teaching Matters consultants will work with each of the core areas, i.e.; ELA, Science, Mathematics and Social Studies. Their work with our faculty will provide us with the best practices needed to work with all students - including our English Language Learners. The Center for Applied Linguistics (CAL) is also scheduled to work with our staff in the coming months, conducting an overall needs assessment, so that all teachers will be able to effectively modify instruction to meet the needs of our ELLs in every classroom. English Language learners who have IEPs receive push-in and pull-out instruction, as per the requirements of their IEP.. also Teachers collaborate and plan for both instruction and assessment purposes for all ELL students. Student are required to use accountable talk during classroom discussion and this provides an avenue to regularly check their capability in reference to the speaking modality. They have to read an independent reading book and then write a response with prompting, some translations and accommodations by the ELL teachers which is how the reading modality is assessed. They have to regular participate in classroom presentations which requires them to listen keenly and write comments and observations. This is a frequent assessment for the listening, speaking, reading and writing modalities. Mandated instruction for former ELLs require at least two years of ELL services to support students who exit out of ELL status including:• A half unit of study of Integrated ENL/ESL in ELA and Math, Science or Social Studies. The Test Accommodations for ELLs are as follows: Time Extension (all exams): "time and a half"; Separate Location (all exams): In small groups in a separate location; Third Reading of Instruction and Passages (English Language Arts Exams Only); Bilingual Dictionaries and/or Glossaries: ELLs may use bilingual glossaries when taking State examinations in all subjects except foreign languages. We provide the following supports for our SIFE students, as follows: Success Maker - an online learning program developed by Pearson; Differentiated Instruction ie. development of performance task by levels of proficiency, as well as assessments; Alphabet recognition and Phonemic awareness instruction; Bilingual fiction and non-fiction texts; Academic Intervention Services and Supplemental Education Services The mandated services for Former 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ESL teachers and content area teachers of ELL-SWDs meet on a regular basis to collaborate on lesson planning and scaffolding supports for these students. ELL-SWDs have materials differentiated for their use in content area classes, enabling them to have access to content area instruction as well as focusing on English language development. The school focuses on teachers using common core materials and devising methodologies for student engagement aligned with common core standards for all learners. Some strategies used are providing visual representation of difficult concepts and vocabulary, front loading difficult vocabulary, providing graphic organizers and samples or models for all students with emphasis on providing varied entry points for ELL and SWD students. The school provides technology in the form of Ipads, laptops and graphic organizers. ELL-SWDs students receive ELL services and SWD services provided by both Specialists. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? All ELL-SWDs are placed in the least restrictive environment, as per their IEP. Currently 7 of our 34 students are placed in self-contained classes. The RTI team in our building constantly requests evidence and feedback from teachers and other competent 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71  staff as to the performance of these students in content level classes. If the ELL-SWD student seems to be performing beyond the level in a certain setting, the student may be recommended by a teacher for a less restrictive environment. Last year, several ELL-SWD students in self-contained less restrictive environment based on their performance during evaluation or observation by the Specialists and teachers in our school. Instructional planning for ELL-SWDs is a collaborative effort with the ESL teachers and the Special Education teachers working with the identified students, as well as the school's guidance counselors and school psychologist. Flexible grouping and programming in our building and the alignment of curriculum in content area and grade levels makes it easy to maximize the time that ELLs and SWDSs spend with non-disable peers. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Intervention services for ELLs in the content areas are addressed through our Title III supplemental instruction programs offerings, (ie: after school and in our Saturday program). Additionally, students are recruited to participate in programs offered by the City Year staff members, as well as the Beacon program that is housed in our school. All program offerings are delivered in English. In Science ELL students have options of participating in Robotics. For Mathematics interventions, ELL students can participate in chess in addition to the Extended Learning time after school and pull-out by Specialists to support their mathematic skills. For English Language Arts, they can participate in drama and dance during extended learning where they are allowed to speak and read in English. In Social Studies, students can participate in Extended Learning 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? This year we will be utilizing a new program (Sound Reading, Achieve 300) for ELL-SWD students that is a computerized reading program to help with phonics and comprehension. We will utilize two other programs developed by Pearson (Success Maker and and the ILIT program) Both of these are computerized program to help increase vocabulary and comprehension for ELL and SWD students. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We are not discontinuing any programs this year for ELLs as all of the programs being used are relatively new. We will have to monitor the data for improvement and give some additional time to see results before the discontinuance of any program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs. Notifications to students and parents are made available in their native language. Additionally , there are many programs that have targeted recruitment for ELL students. Among the supplemental and after schools offerings at our school are STEAM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts and Mathematics) related programs such as (First Lego League robotics program, Sea Perch underwater robotics, Chess, Gardening program, etc.) provided by our Magnet Grant 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. MS126 is a STEAM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts and Mathematics) school and therefore has an abundant supply of resources in technology that are used to enhance instruction. All of our classrooms have Smart Boards and document cameras, and students have access to laptops, iPads and other technological resources. Our school has a Technology Lab, and all students will have Technology Lab programmed to their schedules before they graduate. ILIT, an Internet based literature program and sound reading a reading program on phonics is available to our ELLs. All content area materials are modified by he ELL teachers to find entry points for our ELL students. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Some of our ESL teachers do speak the native languages (Polish and Spanish) and do provide native language support. ESL teachers provide additional support in the child's native language. Students are encouraged to respond in their native language and these responses are celebrated as part of the learning process and as a bridge towards language acquisition. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72  14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. MS 126 is now a Community school. We have all of our community based organizations collaborating to give the ultimate social, emotional, financial and academic support to our students using a centralized and unified model. All service providers and professionals in our building communicate and collaborate for the benefit of all our populations and parents. Our schools' support team meets on a monthly basis to evaluate and assure that all student support services are being met. We jointly create an action plan to ensure that these services are met. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? MS126 is a STEAM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts and Mathematics) school and therefore has an abundant supply of resources in technology that are used to enhance instruction. All of our classrooms have Smart Boards and document cameras, and students have access to laptops, iPads and other technological resources. Our school has a Technology Lab, and alll students will have Technology Lab programmed to their schedules before they graduate. ILIT, an internet based literature program and sound reading a reading program on phonics is available to our ELLs. All content area materials are modified by he ELL teachers to find entry points for our ELL students. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly identified ELLs, as well as incoming 6th graders, participate in our Summer Success Academy, which operates in August, two weeks prior to the start of the school year. Students receive supplemental instruction in Math and ELA, and they are acculturated to their new middle school environment. There is also a welcoming reception for all ELL students and their families in September. Newly identified ELL students, who enroll during the school year, are paired with another student who shares the new students native language, to assist in their transition to the new environment. They are also recruited to participate in our after-school and Saturday programs for ELLs. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? MS 126 last school year offered Spanish as an elective. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not applicable Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? At MS126 we believe that all of our faculty members are partners responsible for the education of our ELL students. Accordingly, professional development is encouraged throughout the year as our ELL teachers collaborate with content area teachers to service students mandated to receive ESL instruction. Our ESL teachers take advantage of the professional development opportunities sponsored through the DOE - Office of ELLs as well as assorted professional development activities provided by 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73  our network, CEI-PEA. The Assistant Principal and two ESL teachers have attended professional development workshops that included an in-depth study of the Common Core State Standards, with which we have aligned our curricula in all academic areas. One of our ESL teachers has attended 3 days of professional development in the use of the AMAO (Annual Measurable Achievement Objective) tool to assist in identifying instructional recommendations, based on data. All of our ESL teachers have been trained in the use of ELLIS (English Language Learner Instructional System), a web based program developed by Pearson that helps to gauge a student's current level of English proficiency, and which allows students to progress at their own pace as they master language objectives moving toward fluency. We have partnered for two years with Pearson. All teaching staff (since all teaching staff work with our ELLs throughout the day) will receive SIOP (Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol) professional development; a research based approach to teaching that helps prepare all students, especially ELLs, to become college and career ready. It is imperative that proven teaching methodologies, specific to ELLs, be utilized throughout the building. Our ELLs form bonds with their ESL teachers and with their guidance counselors, who assist with their transition to high school. Our counselors and other service providers are also available for students, as needed, as the students adjust to life in middle school and to prepare for the high school application process. After school groups for ELL students, led by our City Year staff members, assist with easing the transition of our ELL students to a new environment and the middle school experience. The guidance counselor and ESL Coordinator also meet regularly with teachers, on an informal basis, to answer questions and/or to provide key information that will help ELLs to be successful in the classroom. The 7.5 hours of ELL training for all staff is provided by Pearson, CEI-PEA and through faculty conferences, as appropriate. Records of professional development are maintained in teachers' individual files, and in a professional development file and log in the general office. Our principal also asks that staff members complete a reflection sheet upon completion of a professional development workshop. t The Assistant Principal and three ESL teachers have attended professional development workshops that included an in-depth study of the Common Core State Standards, with which we have aligned our curricula in all academic areas. One of our ESL teachers has attended 3 days of professional development in the use of the AMAO (Annual Measurable Achievement Objective) tool to assist in identifying instructional recommendations, based on data. All of our ESL teachers have been trained in the use of ELLIS (English Language Learner Instructional System), they a web based program developed by Pearson that helps to gauge a student's current level of English proficiency, and which allows students to progress at their own pace as they master language objectives moving toward fluency. They are trained in using the SIOP model which approaches the teaching of Language to ELL in all four modalities. The materials that teachers are expected to present to ELL students are Common Core Learning Standards curriculum modified to give ELL students access to this curriculum. The ELL teachers are required to find these materials on the reading level of the students or modify this material to meet the students need for access to the material. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The Staff has professional developments every Monday and Tuesday provided by their peers or outside consultants to provide them with resources to assist ELL students as they transition from middle to high school. Guidance counsellors attend professional development on High School Articulations and High School Fairs to ascertain what High Schools have to offer to ELL students. MS 126 meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2 by meeting every Monday and Tuesday after school which is sufficient to cover the 15% of total hours for all teachers. There are no bilingual teachers or program at our school. Agendas, attendance and other materials are kept by the school secretary in the school's main office with access to the public. Most of our professional development focus on rigorous instructions which includes instructions for all students in our building including ELLs. One of the primary focus for instruction this year is on academic vocabulary on all grade levels and content level school wide. Records are maintained in the School's main office by the school Secretary for public review. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 74  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The Annual Meetings for parents of ELL students in our building are conducted by the ELL teachers and supervised by an Assistant Principal. At MS 126, we understand that parents are a great asset to our school. Our parents receive an orientation informing them of the various programs we have available for our ELL students. Parents are also invited to "Greet and Meet", a monthly conference for parents to speak with teachers and administrators about any questions regarding the school curriculum and their child's progress report. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. We have workshops for all parents every month to discuss the curriculum, the school's expectations and to answer questions from parents may have about the services our school provides and any other concerns they may have which includes concern by parents of ELL and SWD students. ELL parents are active in our Parent Teachers Associations meeting which are conducted in English and Spanish which is the highest population of parents with ELL students. The parent coordinator who is also a fluent in Spanish, the language of most of our ELL parents keep all parents informed of opportunities for parent involvement and workshops. She plans and implements activities for ELL parents in our schools and in other locations. Parents attended an ELL workshop at New York University to articulate the effect of the Common Core Learning Standards on their children's performance. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 75 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Maria Ortega, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 76  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: John Ericsson MS 126 School DBN: 14K126 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Maria Ortega Title Principal Jeffrey Merced Assistant Principal Evelyn Castillo Parent Coordinator Stacey Falberg ENL/Bilingual Teacher Ewa Pirog D. Blaszczak Parent Teacher/Subject Area M. Brumskine Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Sergio Zamora School Counselor Alicja Winnicki Camilla Holmes Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-FL 77  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 14K126 School Name: John Ericsson Middle School 126 Superintendent: Alicja Winnicki The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Jeffrey Merced AP No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. When educational delivery options are explained to parents during student intake then parents are also assisted (by a licensed pedagogue) with the completion of the Home Language Information Survey (HLIS). Parents are also interviewed informally, in English and in the parent’s native language, with the assistance of an interpreter, if necessary. This information is then entered into ATS and the school formal database. Other methodologies used by our school are the students’ emergency cards, Individual Education Programs of Students where Language preference for parents are also listed and any other surveys which request information on the parent’s preference for Language of Communication. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 78  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language The preferred languages for both written and oral communication by parents are Spanish, Arabic and Polish. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. n/a Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The documents that our school typically disseminates every year that require translations are the annual handbooks, Open House announcements, the schools parent-teacher conferences announcements, after school program information, New York State testing dates, general overview of student curriculum, letters from the Superintendent and other School Community partners correspondences. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 79  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Our school usually has face to face meeting during our open house for prospective students which are held at least 4 times a year or once every three months. We also have face to face meetings with parents before in June with prospective incoming students. We have Open School night for our incoming sixth graders about a week before school starts. We have a three day student orientation for our incoming students and their families. There is also a face to face meeting with parents for all three of the mandated parent teacher conferences. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. All documents are translated into their home language(whenever capable to do so) Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. During staff development opportunities CR A-663 is presented to all staff members and ELL teacher are holding teachers accountable when sending letters home. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The School has developed a Language Access Plan to ensure the provision of appropriate translation and interpretation services for limited English proficient (LEP) parents are in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-663. Limited English Speaking parents are provided with a meaningful opportunity to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education by ensuring : 2018-19 SCEP-FL 80  * that translation services are provided by Staff members literate in the Languages identified • Reflects the current NYC Department of Education organization • Provides that students may not provide translation services • The Translation and Interpretation Unit will provide training to parent coordinators and other key school-based staff on language access requirements. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our Parent Coordinator provides outreach to our new family members. She provide an orientation video in their native language as soon as possible or after the LAB-R has been hand scored by one of our pedagogues (assigned to this task). The program choices are then explained to the parents (in their native language). Our teachers and school counselors speak both English and Spanish. In the event a parent speaks a language other than English or Spanish, we have on staff translators for Polish and Arabic. If we have no one on staff for the language translation requested, an interpreter will be provided. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 81 
