 14K132 School Name: P.S. 132 THE CONSELYEA SCHOOL Principal: BETH LUBECK   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Conselyea Street School 331400010132 Pre-Kindergarten - Fifth School Number (DBN): 14K132 320 Manhattan Avenue Brooklyn, N.Y. 11211 718-599-7301 Phone Number: 718-599-7417 Fax: Stephanie Korotz skorotz@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Beth Lubeck Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Kimberly DeStefano Suzanne Puntillo Stephanie Korotz SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: KenyattaReid N/A N/A N/A Geographical District: 14 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Alicia Winnicki Superintendent: 215 Heyward Street, Room 246, Brooklyn, NY 11206 awinnic@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718.302.7638 Phone Number: 718.302.7638 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Brooklyn North Field Support Center FSC: Bernadette Fitzgerald Executive Director: 131 Livingston St. Brooklyn, N.Y. 11201 Executive Director’s Office Address: BFitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-3107 Phone Number: 718-935-2587 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Beth Lubeck Kimberly DeStefano Suzanne Puntillo Kim Garbiel Stephanie Korotz Kerri Kender Alex Owczarek Dana Plouffe *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Assistant Principal Classroom Teacher Classroom Teacher Classroom Teacher   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Vacancy Matthew Tramonte Beatrice Vazquez Danielle Sanchez Eneda Wanat Meridith Pingree Imani Jones-Ratcliffe Vacancy Edward Smith Classroom Teacher RTI Specialist/SETSS Provider Guidance Counselor Parent Parent Parent Parent Parent Parent   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? At P.S. 132 we believe that creativity must be sparked and fervor for learning must be instilled. We are a school community that embraces change, especially when it can benefit our students.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. A rigorous Common Core State Standards aligned reading and writing curriculum has been created by the staff. Through authentic literature, not only is a true love of literacy fostered, but meeting the individual needs of our students is paramount. We embrace a hands-on approach to mathematics. Students develop a conceptual understanding of key mathematical concepts within real world context. We believe students learn best when they are provided with activities that are aligned to their ability level. Through teachers’ strategic use of intentional groupings, students will develop the ability to learn with one another, independent of direct teaching, through differentiated small group activities with their peers. These multiple entry points will provide access for all learners. We are aware of the importance of the use of technology in today’s society. Technology is incorporated in all subject areas, providing learners with various opportunities to discover its many different purposes. All classrooms in Grades Pre-Kindergarten -5 have Smart Boards in their classrooms to encourage student engagement and participation. Additionally, this year we received both a RESO-A Grant, as well as funding from Eric Adams & Participatory Funding, to purchase additional desktops for students to use in the classroom. Teachers will also receive new printers for each of their rooms, as well as ELMO document cameras to enrich their teaching. The students of P.S. 132 become aware of our community and the world around us as they engage in community service in grades Pre-Kindergarten – Fifth. We believe learning is both meaningful and enjoyable when it is applied to the world in which we live. At P.S. 132, we embrace the opportunity to develop the gifts and talents of all students by providing enrichment opportunities. We provide our students with performing arts residencies on a weekly basis, as well as offer YOGA, TADA and Music in the Brain to all students. The implementation of the School wide Enrichment Model, has empowered students to participate in clusters based upon their interests. We continue to instill the importance of being active and responsible members of our community through rich give back opportunities. We hope our students will learn that giving is a lifelong skill connected to happiness. It is our hope that P.S. 132 becomes a child’s home away from home. When you walk through the doors of P.S. 132, we know you will be able to feel its soul and hear its passionate heartbeat. We are proud to report P.S. 132 was highlighted in the Promising Practices Library in June 2010. The practices our school was celebrated for are “Raising Student Engagement & Teacher Empowerment Through Schoolwide Enrichment.” QR Indicator Aligned to: 1.2 & 4.3 Schoolwide Enrichment allows us to develop the gifts and talents of all students by providing enrichment opportunities in academics, arts, technology and interests. We created a learning community that honors diversity, mutual respect, and preservation of the earth’s resources. We build on the resources of our school and the talents of our staff and community to help develop our enrichment curriculum. Enrichment is no longer for the gifted and talented students but instead to help nurture and support the gifts and talents in all students. This model is a long term commitment. As a school community, we embraced this opportunity to challenge and foster a love of learning in all of our students. The Enrichment Clusters, one component of the Schoolwide Enrichment Model, are groups of students who share the same interests, and who come together during specifically designated time block during the school day to work with a teacher who shares their interests and who usually has knowledge or experience in this area. Enrichment Clusters is an exciting part of the P.S. 132 Community where many members of the community take part in the decision making process. Teachers work hard to plan the enrichment cluster they believe would well suit them; students and parents work together to select an enrichment cluster that not only matches the children’s interest, but also leads to their academic growth. This school year, the administration, SLT and teachers agreed to implement enrichment clusters. 0  Our cycles of Enrichment Clusters will focus on Native American culture, Black History, Hispanic Heritage, Asian Culture and European Culture. The cluster takes place for approximately an 8 week cycle beginning the week of October 4 th . At the end of each cycle, teachers are responsible for creating a performance, art project, book, song or food to present to both the parents and the students of our school. This year we continue to empower our staff in regards to professional development. Teachers are still encouraged to attend professional development sessions they feel will enhance their craft. In turn these teachers present their learning with the faculty. In addition, this year teachers have been further empowered as we highlight best practices. We believe that rich professional development opportunities present themselves on a daily basis in our school. Through informal observations and grade team meetings, the administration strives to highlight teachers and their best professional practices. This year, many grade team meetings are dedicated to professional development. Teachers are asked to host PD sessions in their classrooms during congruence periods in an effort to disseminate best practices amongst the staff. We strongly believe this is a best practice at P.S. 132. At P.S. 132 we strongly believe in giving back to the community. P.S. 132’s students have the opportunity become a part of a community service club called “Community Kids.“ Our “Community Kids” help our Community Service Coordinator run the service projects our school participates in. These service projects are the result of our partnership with Generation On, a National Community Service organization. Our dedication to community service has been celebrated and we are proud to report that this is the third year that P.S. 132 has been chosen to be a Research School for the Mayor’s Service Initiative. This school year, we were selected to participate in the Chancellor's Innovative Grant which focused on Reciprocal Teaching. The assistant principals and two lead teachers, participated in professional development throughout the year provided by Generation Ready. Our school acted as the HOST school this year, therefore the administration and teachers from P.S. 250 visited our teachers three times to observe our teachers utilize Reciprocal Teaching in their classrooms. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. In depth examinations of student data, lead many discussions regarding the benefits of grouping students homogeneously. Teachers spoke off the data, highlighting success stories of students who were instructed in groups based upon ability. Serious concerns came to the table in regards to time management and spending time on task when compacting. Conversations with parents and SLT members highlighted similar observations in terms of time management. A consensus based upon data and teacher/parent input lead to the decision of grouping students homogeneously in the upper grades and heterogeneously in Grades Kindergarten - Second . This decision has allowed true curriculum compacting to come alive, as our teachers now can truly differentiate instruction based upon student ability in individual classroom settings. At the end of the 2015-2016 school year, we conducted a teacher survey to determine their current feelings about grouping students homogeneously versus heterogeneously. The survey results showed that 70% of our classroom teachers are not pleased with homogeneous groups any longer. 30% of our teachers are satisfied with the current homogeneous grouping. Therefore, for the 2016-2017 school year, the administration has decided to begin grouping students heterogeneously in Grades Pre-Kindergarten - second grade. We are going to analyze student data throughout the year to determine if the newly implemented heterogeneous groupings is effective to our students and teachers. Although we have not received our state test scores as of yet, we 1  received the cut scores, and they proved that heterogeneous grouping has improved both instruction and student achievement within the classroom. Therefore, this upcoming year, all students in grades K-5 will be heterogeneously placed in the Fall. This year we continue to empower our staff in regards to professional development. Teachers are still encouraged to attend professional development sessions they feel will enhance their craft. In turn these teachers present their learning with the faculty. In addition, this year teachers have been further empowered as we highlight best practices. We believe that rich professional development opportunities present themselves on a daily basis in our school. Through informal observations and grade team meetings, the administration strives to highlight teachers and their best professional practices. This year, many grade team meetings are dedicated to professional development. Teachers are asked to host PD sessions in their classrooms during congruence periods in an effort to disseminate best practices amongst the staff. We strongly believe this is a best practice at P.S. 132. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. We truly believe that we made the most progress in ensuring our students engage in rigorous instruction on a daily basis. Our teachers are required to create lesson plans that incorporate high level questions, in dept student conversations, differentiated learning groups and activities and formative assessment throughout the lesson. Based on administrative observations, it is apparent that our teachers have established a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. During classroom visits, it was noted that our students ask questions to the teachers, ask questions within their small groups to raise the level of conversations, and take risks during group work. Collaboration amongst teachers has always been the backbone of P.S. 132's success. Since the administration began their leadership 13 years ago, working as a team has been the fashion in which our teachers plan and develop their instruction both in grade teams and vertically. The administration uses creative programming to ensure our teacher teams have a common prep on a daily basis. This schedule was strategically created to ensure teachers have the proper time together to create rigorous instruction and tasks for our students to engage in. 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 14K132 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,SE Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 723 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 25 25 7 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 23 21 7 7 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 41.0% % Attendance Rate 40.1% % Reduced Lunch 7.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.8% 34.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 42.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 15.09 0% 10% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 67.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 98% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 10 10 93.6% 0.6% 10.8% 14.1% 6.6% 2.2% 2 2% 8.1 65.7% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A N/A YES NO N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. At P.S. 132, our instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Based on the teacher observations conducted by the administration, it was noted that students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. We have been highlighted by Superintendent Alicja Winnicki for our rigorous writing program, along with the various forms of feedback we incorporate in our writing program. We would like to continue our focus on feedback, however we would like to infuse all forms of feedback in all content areas. The 2015-2016 State Test scores item skills analysis revealed that our students need to improve in critical thinking skills in both ELA and Mathematics. Our teachers meet weekly in their teacher teams to monitor student progress and achievement. The teachers expressed that our higher level students grades were not moving to the next level. Although the teachers provide feedback to help improve students' writing, teachers felt that the students needed feedback from their peers. Additionally, during our last Quality Review in January 2016, it was suggested that we continue to focus on Reciprocal Teaching, however we will change our focus to sharing discourse around Mathematical concepts. It is our hope that this focus will help raise student engagement and student achievement in the area of critical thinking questions. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will implement multiple forms of feedback, including but not limited to, teacher feedback, peer feedback and student self reflection, into the publishing stages in all content areas. The multiple forms of feedback will result in students scoring at or above proficiency (Level 3 & 4) on all published products across the content areas as measured by content based rubrics and portfolio assessments. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will submit unit of study lesson plans to the administration. These plans will include exemplary pieces, as well as a rubric specific to the unit of study aligned with the Common Core Standards. This rubric and exemplary pieces will help teachers launch each unit. Teachers will launch each unit of study by presenting each rubric, along with an exemplary student product, to ensure students will understand what is expected of them as readers, writers, and mathematicians before engaging in the process. Throughout the unit, teachers will guide students through conferencing and small strategy groups to assist them in producing a high quality product. Teachers will use important conference notes to help drive instruction. It is expected that teachers understand that their lessons might divert from the plans submitted and new lessons should be infused based upon students’ strengths and vulnerabilities. Such rich and thoughtful work will lead to a collection of well developed lesson plans which will be compiled into rigorous teacher created ELA curriculum. In an effort to raise teacher expectations, during grade meetings teachers and administrators will examine authentic pieces of student work using the ATLAS protocol and grade them according to the genre specific rubrics and/or concept specific rubrics. Teachers will score pieces and together discuss their findings. Through this process, teachers will create a standardized practice of measuring student performance. Teacher feedback is crucial in improving student outcomes in all content areas. Teachers will be expected to provide students with constructive feedback that will help them produce on or above grade level writing. Teacher feedback is given during the drafting and revising process, in ELA. This feedback is discussed with the students during this step of the writing process in an effort to assist the student in improving upon his/her piece of writing. The final feedback will be shared on students’ published pieces and will be a clear celebration of how the students implemented the suggestions given during the drafting, revising Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers & students of the school community The start date is September 2018 and the end date is June 2019. The teachers are responsible for implementing the multiple forms of feedback in all content areas. The administration is responsible for overseeing the process in which the feedback is given. The administration will review the artifacts in the student portfolio, as well as the final published products that are displayed in the galleries. Our instructional coaches will support our teachers as they work with their students throughout the writing process. Ethel Mogielnicki, one of our Assistant Principals, worked closely as an intern for our superintendent, Mrs. Winnicki, on developing a variety 5 of forms of feedback for the district. She will lead this continued focus again this school year. and editing process. Students will be held accountable for using teacher feedback when working on publishing a piece of writing. We will incorporate peer feedback into all units of study, so that students learn how to review, critique and give suggestions to their peers. This best practice will prepare our elementary school students for their college years and careers as adults. Students will complete a self reflection at the end of each unit of study. Teachers who promote reflective classrooms ensure that students are fully engaged in the process of making meaning. They organize instruction so that students are the producers, not just the consumers, of knowledge. In the reflective classroom, teachers invite students to make meaning from their experiences overtly in written and oral form. They take the time to invite students to reflect on their learning, to compare intended with actual outcomes, to evaluate their metacognitive strategies, to analyze and draw causal relationships, and to synthesize meanings and apply their learning to new and novel situations. Students know they will not "fail" or make a "mistake," as those terms are generally defined. Instead, reflective students know they can produce personal insight and learn from all their experiences. In addition, an emphasis on the presentation of student published pieces will be refined. Teachers will impart the importance of neatness, proper handwriting and writing mechanics to all students. A sense of pride will be established as student published work is celebrated. In the area of Reading, students will engage in a thematic book project as a culmination of a unit of study. Students will work on in-depth projects that incorporate the reading comprehension skills that were taught throughout the unit of study, as well as encourage critical thinking skills. Students are required to make self-to-text connections, as well as cite evidence from the text. The performance tasks are aligned with the Common Core Standards and are designed to tap into the students’ creativity. Each project contains a content based rubric that will be used to drive instruction, and provide students with feedback that will improve their performance. The administration will conduct informal snapshots throughout the school year that will be used to assist teachers in improving upon their craft. In addition, these snapshots are a great way to observe student engagement, as well as student learning. During these snapshots, the administration has the opportunity to review student notebooks, bulletin board displays & student portfolios. Bulletin Board displays enable the administration to see the student products derived from the performance tasks presented in the areas of Reading and Writing. The entire school 6  community understands that every child is held to grade level Common Core Standards, therefore the administration expects all work displayed to be held to high expectations. Student Portfolios contain the student products derived from the performance tasks presented in Reading and Writing & Mathematics. Writing portfolios will contain drafts that will have teacher feedback. This feedback is an integral component of the writing process, as it enables students to revise their work in order to meet grade level standards. These artifacts will clearly demonstrate the progression and/or refinement of student writing as they engage in the writing process. Reading portfolios contain student reading logs and reading responses that provide evidence of reading 25 books or more throughout the school year. In addition, Reading performance tasks have been created in the form of book projects and are aligned to the Common Core Standards. Each student will be responsible for completing a performance task at the end of the month. These performance tasks will be scored in alignment with a rigorous rubric. Monthly mock ELA exams and bi-monthly progress reports will be placed in Reading portfolios as well to showcase student progress. Writer’s Galleries are displayed in every classroom consisting of published student work from September to June. This display enables the entire school community to showcase the progression of each writer. Literature based book projects are displayed in the classrooms. These projects showcase the students’ ability to respond to literature in a multitude of ways. All displays and bulletin boards will contain task sheets aligned to the Common Core Standards, as well as standard based rubrics, teacher feedback and scored student products. The work displayed on the hallway bulletin boards will meet or exceed grade level standards. Assessment Binders contain reading and writing workshop conference notes. These notes will help teachers drive their instruction. In addition, they will also assist in devising new lessons that will be infused into the reading and writing units of study. Assessment binders will contain teacher notes which detail the feedback given to individual students during each unit. Students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups, will engage in the same forms of feedback as the rest of the student population. However, they will engage in more scaffolded instruction prior to publishing their final product. 7  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will have the opportunity to engage in Parent Workshops throughout the school year. All classroom teachers will conduct monthly informational workshops on a variety of topics that pertain to each grade. Some examples of workshops are; Responsibility Centered Discipline, Fostering Independence in Kindergarten, Strengthening FIne Moter Skills in Pre-Kindergarten, Best Internet Practices and The Importance of Eating Nutritious Foods presented by our Health and Wellness teacher. The Parent Coordinator will assist with parent outreach, and a letter will be sent home at the beginning of each month outlining the workshops being offered for that particular month. All teachers in the school are responsible for planning and conducting monthly workshops. The administration will over see the workshops and review all materials to be distributed prior to the workshop. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 100% Tax Levy funding will be used to fund the Principal and the two assistant principals. . 81.42% of the Achievement Coach's salary will be funded by Tax Levy funds. 18.58% of TL Strong Schools Strong Communities will be utilized to fund the rest of the Achievement Coach's salary. 100% of TL Parent Coordinator Title I 1% parental involvement set aside will be utilized to fund the refreshments for the Parent Workshops. Common Core Standards and Strategies Flip Chart published by Mentoring Minds was purchased for all teachers and was purchased using TL monies. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of February 2019, the administration will monitor and review all students' published writing pieces (in all content areas) on a monthly basis to compare the data to ensure students are reaching grade level standards, as a result of goal related activities to determine if the school is on a course to meet the annual goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Reviewing student portfolios will assist us in determining if students have made progress. Additionally, analyzing the item skills analysis from the State ELA Exam will assist us in determining if students have made progress in this area. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? On our 2015-2016 Quality Review, we received a Well Developed in the area of School Culture which included a supportive environment for our students. Additionally, teachers received ratings of highly effective and effective in their MOTP in the Domain 2 - Creating an Environment of Respect and Rapport (2A) and Managing Student Behavior. (2D) In the Spring of 2018, students in grades K-5 were given a school survey. Through this survey, we determined our next steps that would give our students opportunities to voice opinions and make choices that would positively impact student culture. Additionally, teachers were given a voice regarding ways to support students through Inquiry Work. The student government created a survey which was distributed to our student body to learn more about their feelings toward the school community. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of the students in grades K-5 will have more voice in school policy and opportunities to impact school culture as measured by the Annual Student Survey created by our very own student government. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers will continue to engage in Professional Development conducted by Larry Thompson throughout the school year on the Give Em Five Approach and Road Map to Responsibility. Teachers, students and parents. September 2017 - June 2018 Administration, School Culture Committee & the SLT. Administration, School Culture Committee & the SLT. Teachers, students and parents. September 2018 - June 2019 Teachers, students and parents. September 2018 - June 2019 Teachers, students and parents. September 2018 - June 2019 Administration, School Culture Committee & the SLT. Administration, School Culture Committee & the SLT. Increase visibility and accessibility of Habits of Mind within the school environment. This includes placing prominent signage in our classrooms, hallways and outside fencing and doors. Signage will be translated into Spanish to increase accessibility to ELL students and Spanish speaking parents. Teachers will provide students with weekly classroom lessons based on the Habits of Mind, as well as infuse the Habits of Mind in their daily literacy lessons accordingly. All students, including SWD's and ENL students, will participate in monthly assemblies and receive recognition through rewards and compliments. Students will have access to character building materials and a peer mediation team of students will be developed, based on the Road map to Responsibility. The administration will hold monthly meetings with the School Culture Committee to increase community engagement with the Habits of Mind. The School Culture committee will establish monthly areas of focus. Workshops will be organized and conducted by the team to disseminate information about the Habits of Mind and student government findings and initiatives. The principal will share monthly Habits of Mind through the use monthly PTA Meetings, SLT meetings, and the Principal's newsletter. Teachers will share monthly Habits of Mind through the use of weekly newsletters and parent workshops. 1 The student government will share the monthly Habits of Mind through the daily morning announcements. Overview of Habits of Mind and Road Map to Responsibility will be included in all grades' orientation packets. Guidance counselor and the staff will begin a study group on the Give Em Five process. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will ask our families to be involved with the survey process at the beginning of the school year, especially for our younger students. We want to be sure we are gathering proper student input and ideas before meeting with our student government. We will check in with our parents using a survey four times throughout the school year; September, January, March and May. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Larry Thompson Professional Development - Give Em Five Process & Road Map to Responsibility - $7,000.00 Per Diem funding for teacher coverage for teachers to attend additional PD throughout the school year. Schedule adjustments for monthly assemblies Translation of the Habits of Mind into Spanish. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of February 2018, the School Culture Committee along with the Student Government, will conduct an informal survey for our students to share their opinions on whether or not student voice has improved and has 2  impacted school policy. Once this data is analyzed, the committee will determine if the school is on a course to meet the annual goal. If the survey data shows it has not impacted student policy, a new action plan will be created Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. A Student Survey will be utilized to determine if student voice is being considered more effectively. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Throughout the past few school years, we focused heavily on raising the level of student conversation and the quality of the teacher's questions in the classroom. Although many of our teachers made great gains in this area during their observations as evidenced in Advance, we will continue to focus on raising the level of conversations and questions during the 2017-2018 by infusing Reciprocal Teaching and Thinking Maps into our curriculum. We want our teachers’ questions to probe in depth student thinking and serve to extend understanding in all of our classrooms. Teachers will advance instructional practices by integrating Reciprocal Teaching and Thinking Maps into the curriculum so that students in all classrooms have multiple opportunities to be actively engaged in higher order thinking and meaningful participation. Teachers will raise the level of participation in discussions and will extend students’ inquisitive thinking beyond teacher directed questions or problems. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will participate in professional development in the area of raising the level of questions and classroom discussions based upon a formative observation process 4 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers will be targeted. The start date will be September 2018 and the end date will be June 2019 The administration is responsible for overseeing the activities/strategies being implemented in the classroom. The Academic Coach is responsible for providing classroom support and PD throughout the school year Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The administration will conduct daily walk throughs that will consist of 15- 20 minute instructional snapshots. Feedback will be disseminated to staff members in written form. Snapshot reports will not only include facts regarding the informal observation but also include wonderings that teachers are expected to reflect upon and gather evidence which will further develop their instruction. Teachers will then meet with administrator to discuss plans for improving upon instruction. Members of the administrative team will revisit classrooms after conversations regarding the initial snapshots take place. Teachers and administration will plan next steps as they reflect upon what practices were developed and/or revised. Once practices have been refined, best practices will be shared with grade teams. Teacher performance will be measured using a rubric modeled after Charlotte Danielson’s Framework for Teaching, Domain 3: Instruction, Component 3b: Using Questioning & Discussion Techniques and 3d: Using Assessment in Instruction. To assist with achieving this school wide goal, we have hired Creative School Services to assist in providing PD Opportunities to enrich and extend the curriculum. In addition, we take advantage of all professional development opportunities offered by the Department of Education. EngageNY’s PD opportunities will continue to expose the staff to PD opportunities both in school and on their own time. Teacher leaders are encouraged to seek out PD opportunities relevant to their grade teams. With the mandated Monday PDs, our PD committee has created a relevant and meaningful PD calendar. PD is planned based upon teacher need and feedback shared by the administration through weekly informal classroom observations. In addition, I intend to build teacher capacity by allowing teachers to understand what is expected of them, not only through conversation, but also through observation. A key component of a PD will be highlighting a teacher’s practice from within my school. Teachers who have demonstrated stellar instructional practices will open their classrooms to inter-visitations so their colleagues can learn from their instruction. Highlighting best practices will serve as a PD opportunity for the rest of the staff. 5  Learning from each other is powerful. Teachers will also open their classroom doors and serve as “model sites” for PD provided by Creative School Services. This will assist the staff in understanding how the methodologies being presented are applicable and possible within our school. PD has been provided on questioning using the DOK question stems. Teachers have infused the DOK question stems into the lesson plans and use a DOK question sheet to assist and guide them in asking higher order thinking questions. Teachers will continue to infuse Sandra Kaplan’s Depth and Complexity into their lesson planning. Additionally, teachers will begin to infuse Reciprocal Teaching techniques during the Literacy Block.. Coaches will work with teachers to ensure that higher level questioning and conversation prompts are infused into the lesson plans. Informal classroom observations are also being used as a tool to measure the questioning techniques implemented by classroom teachers. We will continue to highlight best practices to help those struggling in this area. During the 2014-2015, P.S. 132 began a partnership with Thinking Maps. Our lead teachers, coaches and the administration, have engaged in Thinking Maps training. The eight Thinking Maps form a common visual language; a language that can be easily understood and used by students and teachers of every age, level and subject area, within a school building. The maps spring from a developmentally sound and academically proven strategy and they are supported by a committed cohort of educators who are part of the Thinking Maps Community. The eight Thinking Maps enable students to become fully engaged in the act of learning. Thinking Maps Professional Developer, Elizabeth Dellamora, presented an overview of Thinking Maps to the entire staff. Highly effective teachers that arise from these informal snapshots will become in-house professional developers for our school. A professional development calendar will be created based upon the findings of the informal observations. The series of professional development workshops will assist the administration in imparting higher instructional expectations and standards for all staff members. In turn, an improvement in student outcomes will be noted. Teachers Teach Teachers is a program the administration implemented during the 2016-2017 school year. During a Salvadori Residency Architecture period, highly effective teachers would work closely with a non-tenured teacher in an area they needed support in. For example, one of our gifted and talented teachers expressed an interest in learning move about collaborative student groups during Mathematics instruction. 6  Therefore, the administration buddied her up with a highly effecitve seasoned teacher who is extremely strong in teaching Mathematics using collaborative groups. The highly effective teacher worked closely with the non-tenured teacher on a weekly basis for 6 weeks. She demonstrated lessons, co-taught lessons and helped the teacher plan and develop math lesson plans to raise the level of mathematics instruction in the classroom. The teachers who are deemed highly effective by the administrative staff, will conduct Parent Workshops in the areas that they show mastery in. For example, the administration may highlight a teacher for his/her exceptional use of mathematical manipulatives during instruction. The use of hands-on manipulatives provides a visual representation of the math concept being taught during the lesson. Such a strategy is extremely helpful for parents because many of our students need assistance during homework. Parents can utilize items at home as manipulatives to help their children with mathematical concepts they do not understand. The Parent Workshops will be conducted on a monthly basis and will offer parents an enrichment workshop, such as Yoga or craft making, and an educational workshop, like “Using Manipulatives to Better Understand Mathematical Concepts.” 3b – Parent and Family Engagement The start date will be mid November 2018 and the end date will be May 2019 All parents would be invited to our Parent Workshops that are being offered throughout the year. The administration will be responsible for conducting the observations to determine which teachers are Highly Effective. The Parent Coordinator will coordinate the schedule of the Parent Workshops being offered throughout the school year. How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers are required to send a weekly newsletter home providing parents with detailed information regarding the current weeks curriculum and the following weeks curriculum. Additionally, teachers include weekly school happenings and events in the newsletter. Teachers include partnerships and the "Teachers Teach Teachers" initiative taking place in their classrooms. Newsletters are posted on our school website, as well as sent home electronically. Teachers send home paper copies for the families who do not have access to technology. Newsletters begin the first week of school in September. Assistant Principal Stephanie Korotz reviews each newsletter prior to it being sent to parents and being posted on the website. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In order to achieve this goal, we must set aside money in the school budget to pay for Professional Development, instructional resources and human resources. Approximately $20,000 will be set aside to pay for the PD conducted by Creative School Services. In addition, we will set aside approximately $5,000 for PD conducted by Thinking Maps. We will set aside approximately $5,000 for instructional resources to be utilized in the classroom. We will set aside $1,000 for parent instructional materials and refreshments for Parent University. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 7  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of February 2019, the administration will have completed their second round of observations and we will analyze their HEDI ratings and determine which areas are still in need of improvement. At that point, we will examine the professional development the teacher has engaged in so far and will provide teachers with additional levels of support within the classroom setting. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Classroom observations using the Framework for Teaching will be utilized to determine if the PD being provided to teachers is improving their craft in the classroom. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In the 2016-2017 school year, our school engaged in several focused cycles of looking at student work. The inquiry work was conducted across grade level teams , utilizing an established protocol. This work was meaningful, structured and relevant, providing teachers with student data that resulted in shifts in pedagogical practices and adjustments to their curriculum. After speaking with teachers during our end of the year conferences, they expressed that they would like to have more inquiry cycles throughout the school year, on topics they were interested in researching and learning more about. The staff would like to have the cycles predetermined based upon teachers' interest and need and incorporated more fluidly into their professional learning and planning time. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018, 100% of all teachers across all grade levels Pre-Kindergarten - Fifth will engage in a minimum of four predetermined, mapped out and structured Professional Learning Inquiry Group cycles based upon teachers' needs and evidenced by grade planning meeting notes. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). In the Fall, the administration will conduct a Professional Learning Survey. This survey will be created based on the MOTP Teacher ratings, QR Feedback, PPO Feedback and State Test Scores. Teachers will rate the areas they would like to research and learn more about, in addition to taking their teaching needs into consideration. After the administration analyzes the teacher survey results, inquiry group cycles will be established and planned out for the school year. All teachers will adhere to the established inquiry group cycle schedule. During the first meeting of each inquiry group cycle, teachers will create a calendar that will include the work they would engage in throughout the cycle. Additionally, teachers will create a guided inquiry group cycle question that will lead their work. Teachers will meet in their inquiry groups weekly during the Professional Learning period. Teachers will conduct assessments based upon the teaching strategy/approach they are researching. Teachers will collect student data samples to analyze and discuss with their inquiry groups. Teachers will utilize the ATLAS protocol to assist with analyzing student work. Teachers will create an Inquiry Group binder that will contain their professional learning calendar, guiding inquiry question, professional articles based on the researched teaching strategy/approach, student data and inquiry group findings. Teachers will share their findings with all staff members during a collaborative share at the end of each inquiry cycle. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Administration Academic Coach All teachers September 2018- June 2019 Administration Academic Coach All teachers September 2018 - June 2019 All teachers September 2018- June 2019 Lead Teachers/ Inquiry Group Administration Academic Coach Lead Teachers/ Inquiry Group Administration Academic Coach Lead Teachers/ Inquiry Group 0  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Using our SLT and PTA as a forum, the administration will share all of the details regarding the Professional Learning Communities with the parents. Additionally, teachers will incorporate what they researched and learned during their inquiry groups during their Parent Workshops and in their weekly newsletters. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per Session funding for the Academic Coach and Lead Teachers. NYSTL Textbook Money for Professional Books. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The Inquiry Group Cycle binder will be collected after each cycle to determine if the inquiry work was effective and if the teaching strategy or approach effected student achievement. The administration will analyze student data samples to determine if the strategy or approach should be implemented in classrooms. At the end of each inquiry group, the team is required to present their findings to the rest of the staff using a power point and distributing documents. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Reviewing the Inquiry Cycle binders will determine if teachers have effectively engaged in the inquiry work. Additionally, examining the student data in the inquiry groups binder will assist the administration in determining whether the work the teachers have engaged in has had an impact on student learning. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the results of the 2017-2018 School Survey, we will continue working hard to create a welcoming environment for families to address the need of the 4% of families that need support in this area. According to the Framework for Great School Results, we received a score of 4.36 in the area of strong family ties. Additionally, we received a score of 4.0 in the area of parent outreach and 4.5 in the area of parental involvement. In an effort to enhance parent outreach, we have updated our website, ps132ny.com, to include all of the integral information our school community and prospective parents need to know. The administration has been working closely with an SLT/PTA member on updating the website on a weekly basis to ensure all of the documents sent home to families are updated on the website. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will see an increase in parent participation of the school Survey by 10%. 2 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  The PTA will host an "Ask Me Anything" Event for all Pre-K and Kindergarten families on the first day of school. We will host a Back to School Night where parents can meet their child's teachers and participate in workshops to get to know the school better. Pre-Kindergarten & Kindergarten families All parents We will host 9 Parent Workshops will be hosted by teachers a focusing on curriculum & enrichment opportunities for parents & children. All parents Continue hosting community events, as our Harvest Festival, Spring Gala, Kite Festival, Read across America, 100th Day of School Parade. Working with local politicians, we will continue utilizing Participatory Budget Funding to build our "Green Wall". Together with parents, the will wall will be cared for. All parents, local community businesses & politicians. Student government will work to enrich the civic life of school by creating student surveys and infusing student voice in our enrichment cycles. We will establish a Pre-K and Kindergarten welcoming committee to greet kids and families in the morning and to be there in the afternoon. September 2018 PTA, Parent Coordinator Administration Parent Coordinator, Academic Coaches, Administration Administration, Parent Coordinator, Academic Coaches & PTA September 2018 September 2018- June 2019 The 3rd Tuesday of every month September 2018 - June 2019 Harvest Festival - October 2018 100th Day of School - February 2019 Read Across America - March 2019 3  During the 2017-2018 school year, a Diversity & Equity Committee was created as a result of a conversation that took place during a SLT meeting. One of our SLT members volunteered to chair this committee and has been leading the committee through courageous conversations and school wide initiatives. The committee will continue its work in the 2018-2019 school year. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Spring Gala - March 2019 The Annual Williamsburg Kite Festival - May 2019 If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. We have used CITE to provide our parents with informational workshops. Additionally, we will tap into the new Mental Health Program implemented by our Mayor, to assist our families in working with children with special needs, emotional problems and/or immigration issues. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Food and refreshments for the parent events. Funding for Parent Coordinator, Administration, Academic Coaches Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Parent Surveys will be administered to determine if parent engagement has improved. This survey will be administered during various times throughout the school year. Particularly in February and May. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The parent survey will be the instrument used to measure our progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Any child who performs below grade level standards on the baseline assessment in September. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Treasures Intervention Kit (K-2) Wilson Reading Systems (2-3) Academic After School Program (3-5) Saturday Academy (3-5) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Wilson Reading System This AIS service is provided during the school day within the classroom environment. The method of delivery is small group instruction during Literacy Block. Wilson Reading System This AIS service is provided during the school day within the classroom environment. The method of delivery is small group instruction during Literacy Block. Academic After School Program (3-5) This AIS service is provided after school, two times a week, within a small group setting. Students engage in Reading Test Preparation to prepare for the upcoming State Exams Academic After School Program (3-5) This AIS service is provided after school, two times a week, within a small group setting. Students engage in Reading Test Preparation to prepare for the upcoming State Exams. . Saturday Academy (3-5) This AIS service takes place during 8 Saturdays of the school year. This service is provided within a small group setting. Students engage in Reading Saturday Academy (3-5) This AIS service takes place during 8 Saturdays of the school year. This service is provided within a small group setting. Students engage in Reading 5  Mathematics Any child who performs below grade level standards on the baseline assessment in September. Rhymes & Times (1-5) Academic After School Program (3-5) Saturday Academy (3-5) Test Preparation to prepare for the State Exams. Test Preparation to prepare for the State Exams. RAZ Kids - An online literacy based program to help students improve in the areas of reading fluency and comprehension. Rhymes & Times This mathematics program uses the skill of rhyming to assist students to remember their addition facts, subtraction facts, multiplication facts & division facts. The method of delivery is small group instruction during Mathematics blocks of time RAZ Kids - will be utilized in the classroom and during AIS and RTI instruction. The program can also be used at home. Rhymes & Times This mathematics program uses the skill of rhyming to assist students to remember their addition facts, subtraction facts, multiplication facts & division facts. The method of delivery is small group instruction during Mathematics blocks of time Academic After School Program (3-5) This AIS service is provided after school, two times a week, within a small group setting. Students engage in Math Workshop to prepare for the State Exams. Academic After School Program (3-5) This AIS service is provided after school, two times a week, within a small group setting. Students engage in Math Workshop to prepare for the State Exams. Saturday Academy (3-5) This AIS service takes place during 8 Saturdays of the school year. This service is provided within a small group setting. Students engage in Math Saturday Academy (3-5) This AIS service takes place during 8 Saturdays of the school year. This service is provided within a small group setting. Students engage in Math 6  Science Harcourt Science Any child who performs below grade level standards on the baseline assessment in September. Social Studies NYC Social Studies Program Any child who performs below grade level standards on the baseline assessment in September. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Any child who is struggling socially and emotionally during the school year and has parental consent from the parents to be pulled out for at risk services. Guidance Counselor Group Counseling At-risk Services provided by the School Psychologist Workshop to prepare for the State Exams. Workshop to prepare for the State Exams. Harcourt Science Through the use of the Harcourt Science NYC program, Science AIS services are provided to students during their lunch period. The method of delivery is small group instruction Through the use of the Social Studies NYC program, AIS services are provided to students during their lunch period. The method of delivery is small group instruction Group Counseling is scheduled based on the IEP . At – risk services provided by the school psychologist takes place on an as needed basis. Harcourt Science Through the use of the Harcourt Science NYC program, Science AIS services are provided to students during their lunch period. The method of delivery is small group instruction Through the use of the Social Studies NYC program, AIS services are provided to students during their lunch period. The method of delivery is small group instruction Group Counseling - Students who withhold an IEP for counseling are mandated to meet with the Guidance Counselor. Students who require “At Risk” counseling intervention will meet with the guidance counselor based on their situation and/or need. Students receive this service within the school day. Students are pulled out of the classroom and work in small groups in a Special Services classroom. Group counseling deals with social issues such as; peer pressure, self 7  esteem, respecting others, bullying, bereavement, divorce and test anxiety. Students who require “At Risk” services will meet with the School Psychologist based on their situation and/or need. Students receive this service within the school day. Students are pulled out of the classroom and work individually with the school psychologist in a Special Services classroom. The School Psychologist works on strategies and coping mechanisms to deal with issues such as anxiety and behavioral concerns regarding the student’s disability. 8  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 13 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. At risk counseling will be provided to all students in Temporary Housing. Any needed school materials, or clothing, will be provided for any student in temporary housing as expressed by the family. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 9 At risk counseling will be provided to students living in temporary housing, as well as any necessary items will be purchased for these students, using Title 1 set aside. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 0  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. As an administration we strive to highlight best practices demonstrated by our staff. Best practices are quite evident as we conduct informal observations, building walk-throughs, and have discussions with grade teams during weekly congruence sessions. As a cabinet, we speak about our findings and match best practices with the goals set forth for our school. A Professional Development calendar is crafted. Grade teams/specific target teachers are invited to attend PD Sessions held during the day at a congruence meeting. After the Professional Development session, teachers reflect on the learning, complete reflection sheets and discuss with their grade team and supervisors how they plan to implement the best practice they observed into their own classrooms. This school year launched with Professional Development Sessions focusing upon creating a sense of consistency within the school. A Professional Development session held early in the year focused on Classroom Environments. Model classrooms were visited and teachers had the opportunity to take notes and reflect upon their findings. As a result of this PD Session, a sense of consistency is evident amongst our classrooms and our classrooms environments reflect cohesiveness. We take advantage of all professional development opportunities offered by our district. EngageNY’s PD opportunities will continue to expose the staff to PD opportunities both in school and on their own time. Teacher leaders are encouraged to seek out PD opportunities relevant to their grade teams. With the mandated Monday PDs, our PD committee has created a relevant and meaningful PD calendar. PD is planned based upon teacher need and feedback shared by the administration through weekly informal classroom observations. In addition, I intend to build teacher capacity by allowing teachers to understand what is expected of them, not only through conversation, but also through observation. A key component of a PD will be highlighting a teacher’s practice from within my school. Teachers who have demonstrated stellar instructional practices will open their classrooms to inter-visitations so their colleagues can learn from their instruction. Highlighting best practices will serve as a PD opportunity for the rest of the staff. Learning from each other is powerful. Teachers will also open their classroom doors and serve as “model sites” for PD provided by Creative Learning Solutions. This will assist the staff in understanding how the methodologies being presented are applicable and possible within our school. PD has been provided on questioning using the DOK question stems. Teachers have infused the DOK question stems into the lesson plans and use a DOK question sheet to assist and guide them in asking higher order thinking questions. Teachers will begin to infuse Sandra Kaplan’s Depth and Complexity into their lesson planning. Additionally, teaches will begin to explore Reciprocal Teaching techniques. Coaches will work with teachers to ensure that higher level questioning and conversation prompts are infused into the lesson plans. Informal classroom observations are also 1  being used as a tool to measure the questioning techniques implemented by classroom teachers. We will continue to highlight best practices to help those struggling in this area. In an effort to support new teachers and teachers in need of additional support with classroom management, a PD Session was hosted by a 5 th Grade teacher that demonstrates strong classroom management techniques. Teachers that attend this PD Session had the opportunity to observe classroom management techniques that focus upon positive reinforcement and building independence and student character. This PD Session proved to be quite successful, as uniformity in behavior management arose. A third grade teacher was highlighted for her best practice of infusing learning centers into her classroom. This teacher learned of the value of learning centers during the summer when she attended Confratute. The implementation of centers into her room provided students with the opportunity to complete differentiated independent center work. Teachers of higher exponent classes were invited to this session and created centers in their rooms. The creation of centers allows for teachers to differentiate instruction and focus in on instructing small strategy groups. The fervor for the creation of learning centers has been sparked as other classroom teachers have begun to implement the use of centers as well. A 5 th Grade teacher hosted a Professional Development session that highlighted the use of a homemade Lesson Plan Books and Data Assessment Binders that she and her colleague had created. The creation of this book lead discussions about the importance of consistent methods of data collection grade-wide, as well as school-wide. As this teacher highlighted her work, grade teams began to speak about how they would like to create assessment binders that met the individual needs of their specific grade. Grade teams planned together what data spreadsheets they wanted to include in their assessment binders. Spreadsheets that would aide in the collection of both hard and soft data specific to grade needs were created by grade teams. Alongside the academic coach, lead teachers on each grade worked together to create individual class assessment binders specific to grade set goals. At P.S. 132, teachers engage in Professional Development both in and out of house. For the past nine years, teachers who have showed interest in learning more about differentiation during the summer months, attended Confratute at the University of Connecticut. These teachers then turn key their new found knowledge during common preps with their colleagues. Teachers have also participated in Professional Development around the following areas and have presented the content to the appropriate personnel; Title 2B Math Grant, RTI, SESIS & Common Core State Standards. We proudly celebrate teachers and their best practices by selecting teachers to present Professional Development Sessions at congruence meetings. Teachers are selected to present PD based upon the work they do within their classroom settings to support differentiation, their use of data to drive small strategy group instruction and the consistency amongst the classrooms which results in a feeling of school wide cohesiveness. Teachers Teach Teachers is a program the administration implemented during the 2016-2017 school year. During a Salvadori Residency Architecture period, highly effective teachers would work closely with a non-tenured teacher in an area they needed support in. For example, one of our gifted and talented teachers expressed an interest in learning move about collaborative student groups during Mathematics instruction. Therefore, the administration buddied her up with a highly effecitve seasoned teacher who is extremely strong in teaching Mathematics using collaborative groups. The highly effective teacher worked closely with the non-tenured teacher on a weekly basis for 6 weeks. She demonstrated lessons, co-taught lessons and helped the teacher plan and develop math lesson plans to raise the level of mathematics instruction in the classroom 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). 2  Highly effective teachers that arise from informal snapshots will become in-house professional developers for our school. A professional development calendar will be created based upon the findings of the informal observations. The series of professional development workshops will assist the administration in imparting higher instructional expectations and standards for all staff members. In turn, an improvement in student outcomes will be noted. For the first time the administration has created a teacher resource center in the school. Teachers have access to computers, smartboard, school wide curriculum maps, I CAN statements for every grade, teacher resources and materials. In addition, this center is utilized for our weekly professional development sessions. The workshops are presented based on the needs of the teachers. In August, teachers were asked to complete a Teacher Professional Growth Survey. Teachers were asked to write their goals for the school year, as well as the areas they believed they needed support in. Based on the teachers’ needs, a professional development calendar was created. Additionally, professional development is aligned to the observation process. Following each informal observation, teachers are asked to partake in either a Learning Opportunity on ARIS Learn or an “in-house” professional development that may consist of intervisitations or classroom coaching provided by the two academic coaches. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Our students in Pre-Kindergarten are held to the Common Core State Standards. Pre-Kindergarten teachers are expected to plan curriculum that is aligned to Common Core. Students are expected to know all of their letters and sounds by the end of Pre-Kindergarten. Teachers expose their students to pre-literacy skills, mathematical concept, social studies and science units of study. Such rigorous instruction ensures our students are prepared for the elementary school program 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 3  Every week, classroom teachers meet with the administration to discuss curriculum planning, assessments and student progress. On a monthly basis, teachers and the administration analyze student work and data using the ATLAS protocol. During this session, teachers are asked to examine student work taking notice of any trends, patterns and/or observations they have. Then they discuss what they think the data/student work suggests. Teachers then determine what the implications for classroom practice are. Teachers are empowered to facilitate examining student work sessions, along with the academic coaches’ support. Teachers are required to create a plan of action for their next steps in the classroom once they identify students’ weaknesses and areas of strength 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Federal 430,946 69,870 Title III, Part A Federal 12,366 Title III, Immigrant Federal 0 Tax Levy (FSF) Local 3,330,472 X X X X 4 Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5a/ Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment, Section 5c/ Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Section 5c/ Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Section 5c/ Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Section 5a/ Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment, Section 5c/ Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment  1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated: 5   Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 6  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 132, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 132 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 7  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;  provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; 8   schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 132 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessment 9  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 0  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 1  ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; 2  ● always try my best to learn. 3  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 4  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 2 2 N/A Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: At P.S. 132, we believe that all of our students, including the ENLs and SWDs, should be afforded the same learning experience in our classrooms. Therefore, our ENL teachers work collaboratively with our classroom teachers to provide proper scaffolds within the classroom during instruction. Additionally, for some periods, the ENL teachers pull out the students to work on the program, "The Power of Language." This program focuses heavily on phonemic awareness, grammar, sentence development and structure, reading comprehension and essay writing. ENL is provided to students within our K-5 population. Within the 48 students, there are SWD's. Students scoring at beginner and intermediate levels receive 360 minutes of instruction within the context of Reading, Writing and Math Workshops. Advanced students receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction per week. We provide a push in/pull out program which is implemented during Reading and Mathematics instruction. Health, Computers, Art, Performing Arts & Music instruction is provided to ENLs in English. On staff we have two certified ENL teachers who provide ENL instruction to our ENL students. Our ENL teachers will offer parent orientations at P.S. 132 in early Fall and in the Spring. The ENL teachers utilize the English language during instruction. In addition to all of the academic support provided to our ENL population throughout the school day, ENL students are offered the opportunity to attend a rigorous After School Program which runs simultaneously with our Academic After School Program. The administration strongly believes it is imperative that our ENL teacher provides supplementary instructional support in ELA and Math to our ENL students because they need to meet grade level standards. Our ELL teacher, along with another teacher who holds a bilingual license, provides additional support, after school hours on Wednesdays & Thursdays, to prepare our ELL students for the Statewide ELA & Mathematics exam. Therefore, all ENL students were invited to participate in this program and will have the opportunity to receive additional support two times a week after school. The program services from 20 to 30 students two days a week for one and a half hours each day (Wednesday & Thursday) for 29 sessions. One group is comprised of first and second graders and the other group is comprised of 3rd & 4th graders. This program will begin in January and will continue through May. In addition, a Saturday Academy will be offered to all ELL students for 4 hours a day for 7 weeks prior to the Statewide Assessments. Students will receive a letter in their home language, inviting them to participate in the Saturday Academy. The ELL teacher, and another Bilingual certified teacher, will provide small group instruction in the areas of ELA and Mathematics. During the Saturday Academy, the ENL classes will be small, (10 students) which will enable the ELL teachers to individualize instruction. One group will consist of 1st and 2nd Graders and the other group will be 5  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information comprised of 3rd & 4th Graders. Teachers are required to take attendance using a school created roster and daily student data is collected to keep track of student progress. Teachers will hone in on the weakness and strengths of each student. Therefore, students who are at the advanced level of the ENL program will work on enrichment activities. Students who need additional support, will be provided instruction using The Language Power Program, Wilson Fundations, and using authentic literature. The program will be taught in the English language. The authentic literature will be supplemental to the resources used during the regular school day. Title III funds will be used to purchase supplementary libraries, writing materials, software and resource books. We utilize guided reading books from Capstone publishers and scholastic. Along with using the software, MyOn, to assist with decoding and reading comprehension. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Our ELL Title III teacher will continue to attend monthly Professional Development Workshops offered by the NYCDOE during the school year. These workshops will provide our ELL teacher with techniques to assist our ELL learners. Most of the school day, our ELL teacher pushes in the classrooms to instruct her students, therefore it is imperative that she is fully trained in the ELA and Mathematics programs utilized in the school. Our ELL teacher is also involved in all professional development around the State wide test preparation. All of the PD our ENL teachers attend are selected by the administration and should positively impact our ENL students' achievement. Our ENL teachers attend PD on a monthly basis outside of the school. Approximately 10 sessions a year. The teachers are required to submit their agendas to the administration and these are filed in the school building. My testing coordinator and data specialist turn key all new information regarding the state wide test to the ELL teacher. This ensures her instruction is cohesive with the instruction taking place in the classrooms. Title III will also provide direct professional developments for the Title III teachers working in the after-school program and the Saturday program. The assistant principal schedules the professional development workshops for the ELL teacher. The administration, along with the Achievement Coach, will conduct workshops on, Mathematical Strategies for ELLs on Wednesday, January 30, 2019 at 6:00 P.M. Bridging the Gap in ELA on February 13, 2019 at 6:00 P.M, Bridging the Gap in Mathematics on March 13, 2019 at 6:00 P.M. Additionally, the ELL teachers will conduct student progress meetings with our ELL students' families on November 7, 2018 at 6:00 P.M, January 23 2019 at 7:00 P.M., March 6, 2019 at 7:00 P.M. and May 8, 2019 at 7:00 P.M. Our ELL teacher will attend grade level meetings as needed. This will allow the classroom teachers the opportunity to share success and concerns with the ELL provider. ELL instructors will provide instructional strategies to assist the classroom teachers better serve their ELL students. P.S. 132 devotes common prep planning sessions to analyze data. Each teacher reviewed their current class’ data to help launch instruction based upon every student’s individual needs. We utilize Parent Involvement money, when needed, to fund these programs since we invite all parents to these workshops. We empower our staff to make suggestions regarding the professional development they would like to participate in. Teachers are afforded the opportunity to attend professional development 6  Part C: Professional Development workshops. We understand the importance of sharing their best practices with their colleagues. We also encourage inter-visitations within our own school environment. These inter-visitations are dedicated to visiting a classroom where a teacher is implementing a best practice with a group of students. We feel sharing these practices are crucial for continued growth and development as educators. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: In an effort to increase parental engagement with our ELL parents, we will conduct a ELL Parent University on a monthly basis to assist in the following areas; homework help, Common Core State Standards, ELA & Mathematics instruction support & preparing for the NYS Exams. The coaches & ELL teacher will conduct the ELL Parent University. All Title III/ENL parents will be invited to attend the workshops via a letter in their home language. If the ENL teachers notice there is not a big response, they will call and invite the parents individually. There will be 10 workshops offered throughout the school year. Agendas and attention sheets will be collected by the administration following each workshop. We will utilize Parent Involvement money for the cost of the materials and refreshments for the workshops. September 26, 2018 at 8:30 A.M. & 4:00 P.M. - ENL Orientation - Presented by Dorothy Caldone (ENL Teacher) October 24, 2018 at 6:00 P.M. - Introduction to the ENL Curriculum - Presented by Dorothy Caldone (ENL Teacher) & Tanya Napoli (Academic Coach) November 14, 2018 at 6:00 P.M. - RAZ Kids Workshop for ENL Parents - Presented by Dorothy Caldone (ENL Teacher) November 7, 2018 at 6:00 P.M. - Meeting with all ENL Parents Regarding their Child's Progress in the ENL Program December 12, 2018 at 6:00 P.M. - ENL Night - Q & A and Parent Resources - Presented by Dorothy Caldone (ENL Teacher) January 23, 2019 at 6:00 P.M. - Technology and Language Development - Presented by Dorothy Caldone & Angela Aragona(ENL Teacher & Technology Teacher) January 23, 2019 at 7:00 P.M. - Mid Year Progress Meeting with All ENL Parents February 6, 2019 at 6:00 P.M. - Bilingual Technology Reading Project - Presented by Dorothy Caldone (ENL Teacher) & Angela Aragona (Technology Teacher) March 6, 2019 at 6:00 P.M. - Special Education Reading with ENL Students - Presented by Dorothy Caldone (ENL Teacher) and Gia Raimo (Special Education Teacher) April 24, 2019 at 6:00 P.M. - NYSESLAT Parent Information Night - Presented by Dorothy Caldone (ENL Teacher) 7  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities May 8, 2019 at 6:00 P.M. - Collaborative Project with Technology - Presented by Dorothy Caldone (ENL Teacher) & Angela Aragona (Technology Teacher) May 8, 2019 at 7:00 P.M. - Meeting with all ENL Parents Regarding their Child's Progress in the ENL Program June 12, 2019 at 6:00 P.M. - Summer Program Resources for ENL Students - Presented by Dorothy Caldone (ENL Teacher) In addition, ELL parents will receive a monthly progress report that will inform parents of their child’s raw score and/ or reading level. In addition, the progress report will also include the areas students are showing progress in and the areas of weakness. ELL Parents are also provided with their parent link for the RAZ Kids online resource so that they keep track of their students’ literacy progress. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. n/a Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) n/a  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. n/a Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL n/a 8  9  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 14 School Name P.S. 132 Borough Brooklyn School Number 132 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Beth Lubeck Coach Tanya Napoli ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Dorothy Caldone Teacher/Subject Area Marilyn Tirado/ELL instruction Teacher/Subject Area Domenica Faziola/4 th Grade Related-Service Provider Michael Ferrara/SETSS Superintendent Alcija Winnicki Assistant Principal Stephanie Korotz Coach Ethel Mogielnicki School Counselor Beatrice Vazquez Parent Kim Gabriel Parent Coordinator Yvonne Bach Field Support Center Staff Member Michelle Ghedina Other (Name and Title) Tiziana Como/Pyschologist C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 1 0 D. Student Demographics 0  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 631 Total number of ELLs 48 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 7.61% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? ELL Teacher created assessments, Running records, and Spanish LAB. This data provides us with insights on student reading and comprehension abilities in their home language and in their second language. For instance, the Spanish LAB gives us insight on a student's Spanish proficiency both orally and in print. Further, teacher created assessments determine student familiarity with the foundations of reading such as sight words, letter and blends sounds, and irregularities in the English language. This data informs the school's instructional plan by revealing the gaps students have in their language proficiency. It helps teachers to plan lessons that focus on either developing literacy skills in the second language or transferring these skills from the native language to the second language. For instance, if the Spanish LAB reveals strong reading skills in the Spanish language, instruction is geared toward transferring these skills to English. In addition, this data informs differentiation in 1  school instruction at the classroom level. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? On a daily basis, teachers implement various forms of formative assessment during their lessons. The forms of formative assessments are; Running Records, EXIT cards, teacher created assessments (weekly basis) and end of unit assessments (every 6 to 8 weeks) . Teachers are required to keep a data binder in which they collect student data during every lesson, as well as use the binder to collect the formative data they gather on a daily basis. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We determine whether our ELL program is successful in a number of ways. Our school analyzes the New York State ELA and Mathematics test scores, and the NYSESLAT test scores. Student work, as well as their proficiency level in the ELL program, are also viewed. If a child has not made any progress, it is evident that additional support is necessary. ELLs have smart goals that are appropriate and measurable for their grade level and language proficency level. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Teachers have a common prep period on a daily basis. The ELL teachers are required to meet with the classroom teachers on a monthly basis to review and analyze the student data of their ELL students. The ELL teachers discuss possible interventions with the classroom teachers. When necessary, the SETSS and the RTI specialist are invited to these meetings to help develop an action plan for the ELL students who continue to struggle in a content area. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] All of our ELL students will receive high quality core instruction and within the framework of RTI they will be universally screened and the data will be analyzed through progress monitoring at the Tier 1 level. Through data analysis and teacher observation, students are eligible to receive Tier 2 instruction as they are provided with small group instruction with interventions as needed. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Our administration, teachers, and support staff have utilized spreadsheets to assist us in gathering, analyzing and publishing our data. On a monthly basis, teachers are required to submit data gathered in Literacy, Mathematics, Science and Social Studies. Binders, in turn, are created, providing color coded spreadsheets derived from the data. This allows the administration, teachers, and support staff to have a clear insight into each student’s areas of strengths and weaknesses. Currently, our ELLS are performing at or below grade level 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Teachers are required to meet on a bi weekly basis to examine student data. They then discuss the ELL student data with the ELL providers. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). 2  a. Freestanding ENL program. In the Push-In/Pull Out ESL program we have 48 students, from grades Kindergarten - Fifth. The ELL students range from Beginner to Advanced Proficiency levels. Depending on their proficiency level, they receive from 180 minutes to 360 minutes a week of ESL Push In/Pull Out services. The program model is homogenously grouped according to their proficiency levels. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Our ELA and ELL providers assist the students during classroom instruction. Conferencing, informal assessments, running records and AIS services are done in class as well as during pull out sessions. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In mathematics, in order to ensure our students' academic success, we embrace the following: Ensure adequate licensed personnel to deliver instruction as stipulated by NCLB and CR Part 154. • Analyze ELLs data to become well-informed about the performance of each ELL in order to make sound educational decisions. • Provide opportunities for students to familiarize themselves with mathematical language, such as reading, solving word problems, and using the interactive math word wall. • Incorporating writing as a component of the mathematics lesson, for example, journals. • Provide opportunities to execute problem solving strategies, both written and verbally, to justify their answers. • Ensure the identification and analysis of student strengths and weakness to drive and differentiated instruction. • Collaboration between content area and ESL teachers to map out specific student needs. • Encourage Math teachers to participate in professional development opportunities focusing on ELL instructional needs such as Quality Teaching for English Learners and Community Learning Support Organization. • Ensure that the Academic coach works closely with teachers to support rigorous instruction. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? The ELL teachers work closely with our Testing Coordinator to ensure the correct number of assessments are ordered for each language throughout the school year. This includes periodic assessments and state assessment. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 3  Plan for Newcomers When a new student is registered in our school, we provide the following resources to facilitate the transition: *An informal student assessment to identify the student's Academic Intervention Service needs. * A buddy system pairing the new student with another student in his/her class that will assist during the day with daily lessons and classroom routines. *Encourage students to participate in the Saturday Program and After School activities. Plan for SIFE: At the present time, we do not have any SIFE students in our school. However, our plan of action would be to provide the students with academic intervention services in both ELA and Math. In addition, we would provide these students with ELL after school ELA and Math Program. Plan for Long Term ELLs: Our action plan for long term ELLs is to monitor the progress of students in all content areas and to differentiate instruction for literacy and mathematics. Our long term ELLs are provided with the following: • AIS services in both Literacy and Mathematics. • An After School ELA and Math program, targeting reading, writing, and math skills. • Long term ELLs are encouraged to attend our ELA/Writing and Math Saturday program. Plan for Special Needs Students: Our policy for special needs students includes: • Ensuring that teachers of students with an IEP are familiar with students’ particular needs and all services are provided according to the IEP mandates. • Collaboration between the ESL teacher and members of the School Based Support Team that are familiar with IEP mandates. • Monitoring newcomers and SIFE students for possible special needs status when necessary. Our ELL students with special needs are encouraged to attend the following: • After School ELA/Writing and Math program. • AIS services in both Literacy and Mathematics. • ELA/Writing and Math Saturday program. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Plan for Special Needs Students: Our policy for special needs students includes: • Ensuring that teachers of students with an IEP are familiar with students’ particular needs and all services are provided according to the IEP mandates. • Collaboration between the ESL teacher and members of the School Based Support Team that are familiar with IEP mandates. • Monitoring newcomers and SIFE students for possible special needs status when necessary. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our ELL students with special needs are encouraged to attend the following: • After School ELA/Writing and Math program. • AIS services in both Literacy and Mathematics. 4  • ELA/Writing and Math Saturday program. . : : 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The implications for the school’s LAP and instruction are derived from the strengths and needs noted in the NYSESLAT and other assessments (LAB-R, ACUITY, Teacher Assessments, and informal observations). Adjustments and improvements to our program this year include: • Continue to strongly target language development across the grades and content areas, creating opportunities for active meaningful engagement. • Additional support in listening skills for newcomers, including increased use of technological activities in the classroom. • Small group Academic Intervention classes in ESL to target language modalities according to their needs. • Academic Intervention Services for struggling ELL students and those performing below grade level. • After School classes to help students on all levels to become familiar with the format of the NYSESLAT. Implications for LAP in English Language Arts Area In order to assist our students in both academic achievement and assessment, our plan is to: • Ensure adequate licensed personnel to deliver instruction as stipulated by NCLB and CR Part 154. • Foster collaboration between classroom teachers and ESL teachers to create a stable or strong learning community. • Analyze ELLs data to become well-informed about the performance of each ELL in order to make sound educational decisions. • Provide opportunities for students to be involved in conversations. • Incorporate all language modalities during the lesson, for example group discussions and journals. • Ensure that teachers analyze student’s data to identify strengths and weakness and utilize the findings to drive differentiated instruction. • Encourage teachers to participate on professional development opportunities focusing on instructional strategies for ELLs; such as, Quality Teaching for English Learners and Community Support Learning Organization. • Ensure that Academic coach works closely with all classroom teachers and ELL teachers to support rigorous instruction • Implement a print rich environment, use of ESL dictionaries and glossaries in the classrooms. Implications for LAP in Mathematics Content Area In order to assist our students in both academic achievement and assessment, there is a variety of solutions that we are working with this year. They embrace the following: Ensure adequate licensed personnel to deliver instruction as stipulated by NCLB and CR Part 154 • Analyze ELLs data to become well-informed about the performance of each ELL in order to make sound educational decisions. • Provide opportunities for students to negotiate with mathematics academic language, e.g. reading and solving word problems, interactive word wall • Incorporating writing as a component of the mathematics lesson, e.g. journals • Provide opportunities to convey to others problem solving strategies and the justification of their answer • Ensure the identification and analysis of student strength and weakness to drive and differentiate instruction • Collaboration between content area and ESL teachers to map out student specific needs. • Encourage Math teachers to participate in professional development opportunities focusing on ELL instructional needs; such as, Quality Teaching for English Learners and Community Learning Support Organization. • Ensure that the Academic coach works closely with teachers to support rigorous instruction. Our ESL program is delivered in English. All the services are provided according to the student's grade and proficiency level. ELL students who have reached the proficiency level on the NYSESLAT are given extended time on all State Exams for two years. In the case that the school offers a Reading or Mathematics After School or Saturday program, the former Ells are 5  strongly encouraged to participate. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We are currently using The Power of Language for our ELL program. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our ELL students are afforded equal access to all school programs. Some examples are; Music, Art, Computers, Performing Arts, interest based clubs, Enrichment, After school programs and Saturday Academy. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. All of our classrooms have Smartboards and computer access. Therefore, our ELL students can utilize software programs such as Starfall, Rosetta Stone and RAZ Kids to provide them with the additional support they need. Students are encourages to listen to books on tape to assist with fluency and articulation of letters and words. Leappads are also provided. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Meetings with the ENL families help determine the support the parents are able to provide. Parent Workshops are then planned to assist with the home support component of our ENL program. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. In the lower grades, we utilize Wilson Fundations to support students in the area of phonemic awareness and phonics. Additionally, our teachers in grades K-5 have developed their own Literacy program that is aligned to the CCSS. Within that program, there are multiple entry points for all students with different ability levels. Within this program, there is an ELL support system and resources alligned to the Common Core State Standards. We also utilize Thinking Maps, which enables all students to organize their thoughts about a specific topic or content area in an organized fashion. The Thinking Maps provide a scaffold to the instruction being presented in the classroom. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We provide parents with websites that they can utiilize at home before beginning school. In addition, we have found that many of our ELL students start their education in Head Start programs. The ELL teachers begin their support by engaging new ELLs in interactive learning games and/or activities. These games enable students to interact with the ELL instructors and begins to build a trusting a relationship between the new ELLs students and their teacher. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? 6  d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Both of our ELL teachers will engage in a Professional Learning Community throughout the school year. They will focus heavily on language acquisition in alignment with the core content area instruction. They will conduct a needs assessment based on the ELL students data and then determine what areas of the ELL program need to strengthen or be omitted. The teachers will conduct research and apply highly effective strategies during their ELL groups. The PD will be monitored by the administration. Classroom teachers who are also interesting in such a professional learning community will also participate in the study group. Our ELL teachers participate in the same Professional Development that our classroom teachers engage in. Currently we work closely with Anne Grayson, a staff developer from Creative School Solutions, who has worked closely with all of our teachers on implementing guided reading in the classroom. Guided reading is a strategy that our ELL students would benefit from, as they begin to learn the English language and learn how to read. Additionally, our ELL teachers have engaged in Thinking Maps PD. The eight Thinking Maps form a common visual language; a language that can be easily understood and used by students and teachers of every age, level and subject area, within a school building. The maps spring from a developmentally sound and academically proven strategy and they are supported by a committed cohort of educators who are part of the Thinking Maps Community. The eight Thinking Maps enable students to become fully engaged in the act of learning. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. All of our fifth grade students engage in high level & engaging instruction. Our fifth grade teachers have visited and collaborated with middle school teachers to ensure that they adequately prepare them for middle school curriculum. In addition, our guidance counselor, works very closely with our fifth grade students and teachers throughout the middle school selection and articulation process, to ensure a seamless transition into middle school. Our two ELL teachers will work collaboratively in a professional learning community every Monday during our PD time. They will partake in a minimum of 50% of the required professional development hours, including a focus on language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction. Additionally, there will be a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ELL students. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? There is a Parent Orientation in September for every grade. At this meeting, the teacher has the opportunity to introduce herself, or himself. Monthly and yearly goals and expectations are discussed as well as classroom rules and school policies. A parent survey is distributed in the Fall to assess what future workshops parents are interested in attending, for example, how to better assist children when completing their homework. Parent workshops are then conducted based on the needs and interest of the parents. These workshops will be advertised on flyers and community posters as well as on our school 7  website. Translation is available. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our school holds various parental involvement activities. At Halloween time, a Harvest Festival is held in our cafeteria, gym and courtyard. This activity includes food, games and fun for all. To celebrate Read Across America, our staff, children, parents and community guest readers, all dress in comfortable pajamas and march in a parade. To welcome the Spring, A Kite Festival is held in a local community park where colorful kites are flown with music, food, crafts and fun-filled activities. This year, we have added to our festivities with a school-wide Walk-a-thon. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 8 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Beth Lubeck, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 9  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P.S. 132 School DBN: 14K132 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Beth Lubeck Title Principal Stephanie Korotz Assistant Principal Yvonne Bach Parent Coordinator Dorothy Caldone/Marilyn Tirado ENL/Bilingual Teacher Kim Gabriel Parent Domenica Faziola Teacher/Subject Area Michael Ferrara Teacher/Subject Area Tanya Napoli Ethel Mogienicki Coach Coach Beatrice Vazquez School Counselor Alicjia Winnicki Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/30/2017 6/30/2017 6/30/2017 6/30/2017 6/30/2017 6/30/2017 6/30/2017 6/30/2017 9/22/15 9/22/15 9/22/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 0  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 14K132 School Name: P.S. 132 Superintendent: Alicja Winnicki The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. P.S. 132’s staff identifies English Language Learners by offering the parents a Home Language Survey (HLIS) at the time of registration in order to identify the child’s language proficiency. If the child is identified as an eligible candidate for either Bilingual education or English as a Second Language (ESL) instructional services, an informal interview is given to the candidate. Following the informal interview, the candidate is given the Language Battery Assessment (LAB-R). The purpose is to identify the child as an English Language Learner or English Proficient. Our certified ELL Provider conducts the initial screening and administers the LAB-R. An entitlement letter is then provided to parents to inform them about the child’s identification. The child is then enrolled in the appropriate program within ten days. Any student who is entitled for ELL services is required to take the NYSESLAT in the Spring of the current school year. The NYSESLAT is administered to ELLs annually to assess their English Lanuguage Performance. The data from the NYSESLAT will show if our ELLs are making gains annually in the areas of Speaking, Listening, Reading and Writing. This service will continue until the child becomes proficient. 1  In order to enable parents to make sound educational decisions as to which program best meets the needs of their child, parents participate in several activities before they make a decision. Parents participate in an orientation that describes various programs for ELL students and they can visit the classrooms with the various programs. Parents also view a parent information CD where program placement options are presented with clarity and objectivity. This parent orientation CD is available in nine languages. Parent brochures are disseminated in their native language to enrich the understanding of each available program. Parents complete the parent selection form and the school will accommodate the parental choices. Our ELL provider ensures that the parents return the Entitlement letters, Parent Surveys and Program Selection Forms. Our ELL provider is in contact with any parents who have not returned their forms. After reviewing the Parent Survey and Program Selection Forms for the past few years, the majority of our parents select the ESL instructional program. Any parent who wishes to have the child enrolled in bilingual services or a dual program, accomodations are made to assist our families in finding placement within the district. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Spanish, Chinese, Korean, Haitian and Tibetan 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Welcome Letters from all teachers - Opening Week of School Orientation Packets provided by all teachers - September 17, 2015 Arrival & Dismissal Procedures - First Day of School 2  Monthly School Events Calendars Attendance Policy - September 2015 Social & Emotional Learning - Infusing the Habits of Mind in our Classrooms - September 2015 Fall Book Fair Fundraiser - September 2015 Halloween Parade Event Flyer - October 2015 Parent Teacher Conferences Notificaton Letter - November 2015 & March 2016 Weekly Newsletters Provided by All Teachers - Weekly sent via email and hard copy throughout the year 2015-2016 Community Service Project Family Letters - Sent to the families monthly throughout the year 2015-2016 Parent Workshops - Provided by CITE - Conducted 6 times throughout the year 2015-2016 Performance Notificaton Letters - Sent to all families throughout the year 2015-2016 PTA Meeting Notification Letters & Agendas - Sent to the families monthly thoughout the year 2015-2016 SLT Meeting Emails - Sent to families monthly throughout the year 2015-2016 Launch of Performing Arts Residencies Notification Letters - Sent throughout the year 2015-2016 After School Program Notfication Letters - Sent to the families November 2015 3  Saturday Academy Notification Letters - Sent to the families Februray 2016 State Exam Notification Letters - Sent to the families March 2016 Periodic Assessment Notification Letters - Sent to the families four times throughout the year 2015-2016 STARS Report Cards - November 2015, March 2016 and June 2016 Supply Lists - June 2016 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Meet the Teacher Night - September 17, 2015 Parent Teacher Conferences - November 2015 & March 2016 Parent Workshops - Six times throughout the year 2015-2016 SLT Meetings - Monthly throughout the year 2015-2016 PTA Meetings - Monthy throughout the year 2015-2016 Teacher calls to parents - Daily Administration calls to parents - Daily Support Staff calls to parents - Daily Arrival & Dismissal - Parent & Teacher share conversations Performances - Various times throughout the year 2015-2016 4  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The school will disseminate all pertinent information regarding Translation services during our first PTA meeting conducted on September 22, 2015. The school will provide each parent whose primary language is a covered language and who require language assistance services with a copy of the Bill of PArent Rights and Responsibilities, which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services. Additionally, the school will post in a conspicuous location near the entrance of the school a sign in each of the covered languages, or most prominent covered languages, indicating the availability of interpretation services. Our schools safety plan will contain procedures for ensuring parents in need of language access services are not prevented from reaching the school's administrative offices solely due to language barriers. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Through parent surveys and meetings with parents, we will gather feedback regarding the quality and availability of translation services. 5 
