 18K135 School Name: P.S. 135 SHELDON A. BROOKNER Principal: TREVLYN MCRAE   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)  Section 1: School Information Page School Information Sheldon A. Brookner School 18K135 School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Phone Number: 331800010135 Pre-K-5 684 Linden Boulevard 718-693-4363 School Number (DBN): 718-941-0847 Fax: Mrs.TrevlynMcRae tmcrae2@school.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Mrs. Trevlyn McRae Ms. Eileen Cohen Ms. AbiHall Ms. JeanO'Dell Leon N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 18 Ms. Beverly Wilkins Superintendent: 1106 East 95 th Street, Brooklyn, NY 11236 Superintendent’s Office Address: bwilkin@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-566-6008 Phone Number: 718-649-7074 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Brooklyn South Ms. Mauriciere DeGovia FSC: Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 415 89Th Street, Brooklyn, 11209 mdegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-566-6027 Phone Number: 718-649-7074 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Ms. Trevlyn McRae Ms. Eileen Cohen Ms. AbiHall Ms. JeanO’DellLeon Ms. Latonya Hicks Ms. Stacy Kearney Ms. Pamela Savino *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher   Name Ms. Luce Lubin Ms. Gwendolyn Smith Ms. Rozene Cummings Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview The mission of our school is to guarantee that all children are given the highest quality learning experience that will allow them to reach their full potential. We will utilize research-based strategies to address the individual learning styles of all students. Through strategic collaboration and partnership with our parents and community, we will ensure that all of our children become critical thinkers and leaders of the 21 st century.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 135 is a Pre-K to Grade 5 school servicing a population of approximately 577 students. The school has two sites. The main building is located at 684 Linden Blvd, Brooklyn, NY, and accommodates Pre-Kindergarten and Grades 2 through 5, including integrated co-teaching classes and self-contained classes. The Early Childhood Center is located at 5811 Ditmas Avenue, Brooklyn, NY and houses Kindergarten, Grade 1 and one self-contained class. The population of children consists of 85% African-American, 8% Hispanic, and 5% white. There are 53.23% females and 46.17% males. Many are in need of public assistance with 82% of the students receiving free lunch, a poverty indicator. In the 2017-2018 school year, 26% of grades 3-5 students met or exceeded the New York State standards in mathematics and 32% of grades 3-5 students met or exceeded the New York State standard in ELA. Through on-going collaborations and community partnerships, P.S. 135 students continue to engage in the Project Arts and Music program. In addition, we have the P.S. 135’s Chorus and Band. Our music teacher has received the Little Kids Rock Grant which provided us with 25 guitars. A second grant, the "Music and the Brain" grant provided our early childhood grades with 18 keyboards, a curriculum and other resources. Furthermore, the dance teacher received the Arts Space Facilities Grant to enhance our dance education program. The new and improved space allows the teacher to bring increased creativity and imagination to student performances. In 2015, a fifth grade class, P.S.135's Budding Scientists, was invited to participate in STEM Matters N.Y.C program. Our fifth grade students attended workshops at the Intrepid Air, Space and Seas Museum and at Solar 1 where they conducted urban ecosystem experiments. They tested, among other things, the salinity of, and viability of life in the water from the Hudson and East Rivers, culminating in an observational study of "Fracking and its effects on the NYC water supply". Finally, the students attended the 2015 STEM Expo where they interacted with, and evaluated the projects of fellow Budding Scientists. Our school has several partnership relations with outside organizations to address our student achievement and their social emotional skills. ● Many of our boys are enrolled in Boy Scouts America After-School Program housed in our school. Boys learn about accountability and responsibility to themselves, their families, and their communities. ● Our fourth and fifth graders collaborate with PENCIL organization, Price Waterhouse Coopers (PWC) where members of the Business Organization volunteer their services and teach our fourth and fifth grades financial literacy skills. ● Our school was rewarded a CASA Grant in collaboration with Society for Educational Arts (SEA) that addresses students’ academic needs and provides cultural experiences for them. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 0  We have to address the social and emotional needs of our special student population first or simultaneously as we address their academic needs in order to close the achievement gap. Our ELLs consists of 10.40% of our school population. We want to provide foundational skills for ENL students in order to help them achieve grade level standards and to excel academically. Our SWDs consists of 11% of our school population. As a school we want to provide the appropriate support as well as identify and address academic, developmental, functional, social and physical needs of SWDs. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. As a school, we made the most progress in the area of teacher collaboration. Our key areas of focus for this school year are strong family-community ties and rigorous instruction. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 18K135 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 574 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 39 40 22 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 22 23 19 24 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 87.0% % Attendance Rate 82.4% % Reduced Lunch 8.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 0.7% 8.5% 8.0% % Black or African American % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 8.01 0% 3% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 32.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 85% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 18 18 22 92.8% 2.8% 12.0% 80.7% 1.2% 1.6% 2 5% 7.1 26.2% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As a school, we analyzed many quantitative data sources and data trends and summarized the most significant trends based on the 2017-2018 Quality Snapshot and School Survey.  As a strength, data sources 2017-2018 School Survey and 2017-2018 Quality Review: o Findings: 100% of teachers who completed the survey stated that students develop conceptual, procedural, and applied skills in math. Additionally, teachers include opportunities for students to focus deeply on the concepts emphasized in the standards to help students build strong foundations for learning. Students are also provided regular opportunities to interact with academic language. o Our priority needs as indicated by 2017-2018 Quality Review, although some of the curricula reflect alignment to the Common Core Learning Standards and shifts, other units and lesson plans have yet to consistently provide access to challenging tasks for all learners, thus limiting college and career readiness for all learners. Therefore, as a school we will analyze tasks to ensure that the tasks are promoting high level thinking. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders and faculty will create, revise and monitor rigorous tasks weekly to engage all learners and inform instruction to promote high level thinking and student-centered classrooms as measured by 4% increase in proficiency levels on both ELA and Mathematics State exams. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students use assessment cards to indicate their responses to ideas shared and the teacher will encourage the students to elaborate on their responses using evidence from the text. Students with disabilities will receive support from service providers to help them to extend on ideas shared by their peers. Teachers Students, ELLs & SWDs September 2018- December 2019 Service Providers Teachers EX: Speech, OT, PT, ESL Teachers will meet and plan collaboratively during grade level meetings. They will ensure that the assessments are aligned to the CCLS and streamlined to targeted needs and drive instructional objectives. Teachers Students Grades will implement a series of activities based on instructional data. Teachers Students  Teachers and students trained in assessment tools  Training in technology to support instruction  Availability of technology School Leaders Teachers School Leaders Teachers September 2018- June 2019 (Weekly) September 2018- February 2019 Structure of PDs and teacher planning sessions to be goal specific/measurable outcomes: Reciprocal Teaching PDs, The Six Thinking Hats PDs, Thinking Maps PDs, Rigorous Tasks PDs - Levels of Tasks, Three Reads PDs, Instructional Rounds to discuss tasks used during instructional time Teachers Students September 2018- School Leaders Teachers February 2019 - (Three Mondays per month) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 4  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Coordinator, Administration and PTA will engage and support families in understanding Common Core rigorous instruction. We will conduct several workshops in the areas of literacy and mathematics. Key personnel responsible for the implementation would be the teacher in charge of the UFT Teacher Center and parent coordinator. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  UFT Teacher Center Staff, AIS Support Staff  English as a Second Language (ESL) teacher and School Based Support Team (SBST)  Materials  Parents - Share strategies and techniques with parents – workshops, handouts, flyers Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Midpoint Benchmarks: By the end of February 2019, teachers will monitor students' progress by their performance on the interim assessments, and students' participation during instruction as well as the complexity of the tasks to allow for students to engage in conversations. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Instrument of Measure: We will use Literacy and Mathematics Interim Assessments #1 which will be administered in November 2019 and Literacy and Mathematics Interim Assessments # 2 which will be administered in February 2019. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Our school conducted a comprehensive needs assessment aligned with the Framework for Great Schools by focusing on the element of Supportive Environment. The SLT is committed to ensuring that school leaders maintain a school culture where students feel safe, supported and challenged by their teachers and peers to regularly engage in intellectual activity.  Data Source – 2017-2018 School Quality Guide  According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, we have a strong supported environment achieving high scores in measures of safety and social-emotional learning. Evidence indicates that students’ safety and support are continuing to trend towards greater effectiveness. However, as a school, based on our attendance record, many of our students are reporting to school late and we have approximately 80% of our scholars with 90% or better attendance rate. Therefore, members of the SLT and teacher teams, feel that it is necessary for the school to focus on improving student attendance and punctuality. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 90% of students will have a minimum of 90%+ attendance rate as measured by a monthly perfect attendance list (RPAL). 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? We implement ‘school-wide’ initiatives to our ELLs, SWD, etc. Therefore, we do not make exceptions for the expectations for the sub groups. All Students Staff Monthly Administration Staff Parents Students All Students Staff Monthly Administration Staff Parents Students Teachers are empowered to utilize additional areas of support to assist with attendance. Students are recognized for coming to school on time and daily. Students will be given certificates for perfect attendance, no lateness during our Awards Assemblies. The STAR team established Positive Behavior Intervention Systems-P.B.I.S for all students. Shifting from a “Fixed” to “Growth” Mindset. Praising student effort. Teachers who are trained in Restorative Circles will used the program to establish and develop culturally responsive expectations and routines, and to guide student behavior, increase student motivation, engagement, independence which will lead to improved students learning and behavior. Letters will be sent home to parents informing them of their children’s tardiness or absence. All Students Staff Monthly Administration Students are partnered with peers or staff members to foster an environment where students would want to be punctual at all times. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Staff Parents Students 7  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be given parent handbook translated in the languages that represent the school. In addition, the school will make every effort to translate any notices or information in out students home language. The parent coordinator, secretaries and school staff will be responsible for the implementation. Plan workshops aligned to social emotional learning. for example, the school will plan a Restorative Circle workshop and our kindergarten and kindergarten families will attend the ParentCorp Session. this training session/workshops will be organized by the Parent Coordinator in conjunction with PTA. Our ENL parents will attend classes to learn English, facilitated by a former parent. Communicate in various languages of the school community. Use social media to communicate information about attendance to families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Staff – teachers, paraprofessionals, school aides, SBST, parent coordinator Parent Parent volunteers Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Midpoint Benchmark: By the end of February 2019, 85% of our students will have a minimum of 90% attendance. Administration will monitor school attendance on bi-monthly basis and compare the data to measure if attendance rates are increasing or decreasing as a result of goal related activities to determine if the school is on course to meet this annual goal. We will use cumulative attendance report (RPAL) to monitor attendance and punctuality. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Instrument of Measure - Attendance record (Working Class List; monthly printout of students with 100% attendance, no lateness. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As a school, we analyzed many quantitative data sources and data trends and summarized the most significant trends based on the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey and 2017 - 2018 Quality Review.  Data Sources - 2017-2018 Quality Review  Findings: Based on 2017-2018 Quality Review - The collaborative Action Research Project team, along with other content area teacher teams, engage in structured, inquiry-based collaborations. Distributive leadership practices are evident across the school community. On-grade and vertical professional collaborations provide a voice and promote the achievement of school goals and the implementation of the common Core Learning standards while strengthening the instructional capacity of teachers. Findings Based on 2017-2018 School Quality Guide - 100% of the teachers who completed the survey stated that teachers are actively trying to improve their teaching. 94% of the teachers who completed the survey stated that they design instructional programs( for example, lessons and units) together.   Our priority needs as indicated by 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, 34% of teachers say that students respond to challenging questions. In the 2017-2018 school year, 26% of grades 3-5 students met or exceeded the New York State standards in mathematics and 32% of grades 3-5 students met or exceeded the New York State standard in ELA. Therefore, there is a need for the school to focus on the assessments and the results from the data to determine the gap and plan lessons to address students needs and close gaps. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teacher teams of grades K-5 will collaboratively plan common assessments and attend weekly data meetings to analyze data and adjust lessons and unit plans in order to determine the instructional gap and provide targeted instruction to address the needs of the students, and group students to monitor and track student progress as measured by the three ELA and Mathematics Interim Assessments. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teacher teams will meet as a grade weekly during common planning time to analyze data and look at student work Teacher Teams (K-5) to identify common trends for the grade, paying particular attention to subgroups. Based on the results of the inquiry work, teacher teams will plan lessons to address students’ needs and targeted outcomes. Teacher Teams (K-5) Staff members will engage in data carousel to analyze school level data to determine strengths and next steps in teacher practices and students outcomes. Teachers will share strategies/techniques to improve students’ outcomes across school to allow teachers to have a toolkit of strategies to implement. Teachers Paraprofessionals Teacher Teams Teachers will use data obtained from Go Math assessments to differentiate instruction within the mathematics curriculum. Grade Leaders, Teachers November 2018 Data specialist will provide disaggregated results among and across grades. January 2019 May 2019 (quarterly) Teachers will use the data to plan math activities that will allow for multiple entry points, and these activities will occur during the Friday Instructional Block (FIB). Teachers Fridays (October 2018 - Teachers 0 September 2018 - January 2019 Teachers Administration September 2018-June 2019 (Weekly) October 2018 January 2018 May 2018 Teachers Administration Teachers Administrators Teachers Administration Grade Leaders Data Specialist Administration Teachers will participate in a series of research-based On teacher on each grade professional development (PD) sessions such as Teacher Leadership program (TLP). February 2019) September 2018 - January 2019 Teacher Administration Algebra for All to increase pedagogical knowledge, inclusive of technology in instruction, and other areas of need, as evidenced by teacher needs assessment surveys. Grade 5 Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Teachers Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be invited to attend and participate in Math Night, Parent Jeopardy Night, Pajamas Read Aloud, Math Workshops. Teachers, administrators and parent coordinators will be responsible for the implementation. Parents will be working alongside teachers as the students participate in these activities. for examples, parents will be engaged in reading to the other students at te Pajamas Read Aloud. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  UFT Teacher Center Staff, AIS Support Staff  All teachers  English as a Second Language (ESL) teacher and School Based Support Team (SBST)  Materials and manipulatives  Parents - Share strategies and techniques with parents – workshops, handouts, flyers Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Midpoint Benchmarks: Interim Assessments - By the end of January 2019, there will an increase, from Interim Assessment # 1 to Interim Assessment #2, of the number of students meeting or exceeding the Interim Assessment benchmark. Administration will monitor school math data and compare the data to measure if students performance is increasing or decreasing as a result of explicit math instruction to determine if the school is on course to meet this annual goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 1  Instrument of Measure: We will use Go Math! Chapter Assessments & Interim Assessments, instructional tasks, and teacher observations to measure if we are on course to meet this goal. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As a school, we analyzed many quantitative data sources and data trends and summarized the most significant trends based on the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey.  Data Source - 2017-2018 Quality Review Report o Findings: Based on 2017-2018 Quality Review Report, a review of teacher feedback reinforces the school’s instructional focus on questioning and discussion and formative assessment practices for gauging students’ level of understanding during a lesson. In one report, feedback requests that the teacher continually motivate students to explain their rationale behind an answer to deepen their understanding of the concept taught. Suggestions include the use of certain prompts for example, "what are you learning about the passage" and recommend the teacher refrain from providing a response but encouraging the student to further explain. teacher was able to demonstrate highly effective practices during the following observation. Students challenged each other and applied the sentence starters. Similarly, in other observation reports, suggestions from one lesson were incorporated into following lessons, thus furthering the growth of teacher practice, specifically in questioning and discussion skills. However, these practices need to be consistent across classrooms and grades and if these practices improved, then there will be an improvement in students outcomes. Therefore, when best practices are observed across classrooms, those practice will be share on a school level to impact student performance. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will utilize the observation cycle and common assessment cycle to monitor teacher practice and provide feedback based on observable practice and student achievement in order to increase instructional coherence across all classrooms as measured by Advance's Measure of Teacher Practice data for Domain 3 . 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). During the 2018-2019 school year, grade level teams will meet and discuss instructional practices to implement to improve student outcomes. For example, teachers will use the reciprocal teaching approach, Thinking Maps, and the Three Read Protocol. Monthly Administrators Teachers Teachers Paraprofessionals Staff members will participate in professional development to refine their practices using the reciprocal strategy. Teachers December 2018 Teachers Staff members will participate in professional development to refine their practices using the Three Read Protocol. Teachers Special education service providers will meet to discuss the needs of SWDs. The service providers will discuss framing effective goals for the students and identifying strategies to implement to address students needs. Special Education Providers Paraprofessionals Staff members will participate in grade level meetings to discuss the problem of practice and the steps that will be taken to address the problem of practice. Parents Teachers Administrators Parents Administrators Administrators Teachers October 20018 - December 2018 Monthly Administrators School-based Support Team Quarterly Administrators Teacher Parents 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 4  Information related to parent programs, meetings, and other activities will be shared with parents in language that parents can understand. Plan workshops on parent-teacher conferences and how to ask the right questions about children's progress and placement. This workshop will be conducted by our parent coordinators. ELL (English Language Learners) parents will be invited to participate in and ESL (English as a Second Language) class where they are taught to read and learn English. This class will be conducted by a former parent, and our parent coordinator will collaborate with the presenter. Develop and engage parent leaders. The parent coordinator will plan and conduct several workshops to develop and engage our parents. In addition, our parents will be invited and encouraged to attend District or citywide workshops by make sure that flyers and distributed them timely. Parents of SWDs will be given an opportunity to contribute to the formation of their children's goals. Surveys will be sent out to parents, focusing on specific questions that will aid in the crafting of the goals. Recruit parents to become members of our School Leadership Team and PTA Board. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Administrators  UFT Teacher Center Staff  ESL Teacher & SBST Team  AIS Support Staff  Materials  All Teachers Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-point Benchmarks: By the end of January 2019, there will be 25% increase on Mathematics Interim Assessment from February 2019 to May 2019 to determine the impact teacher practice has on students outcomes and classroom instruction. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Instrument of Measure : Teacher observations and results from the interim assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As a school, we analyzed many quantitative data sources and data trends and summarize the most significant trends based on the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey. In addition, analysis of students’ classwork and homework and the number of signed notices returned by students impacted our findings.  Data Source - 2017-2018 School Quality Guide o Findings: Based on 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, our parents indicated that school staff regularly communicates with them about how they help their children learn. Additionally, the survey reflected that teachers at this school work closely with families to meet students’ needs. However, based on 2018 NYS Mathematics and English Language Arts (ELA) tests, less that 35% of our grades 3-5 students are meeting or exceeding state standards. Therefore, if we create a parent engagement plan inclusive of parent-student social/cultural events and academic sponsored family events, parents would be better informed, thereby increasing student performance and impacting the student-home connection in a positive way. o 64% of our parents completed the School Survey. o Findings: Based on 2017-2018 Quality Report Report, monthly parent workshops address topics regarding ways to help their children achieve success in elementary school. Parents participated in the Pajama read aloud night which was held to help increase reading stamina. Newsletters include strategies to assist parents with questioning and discussion techniques underscoring the school’s focus on this aspect of instruction. As a school, we have identified an increase of parent participation in school level events and activities to be a high interest area. Even though we have a large number of parents attending class performances and activities in which students showcase their talents, we have fewer parents attending workshops where there is a sharing of information pertaining to strategies to use to improve students performance. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 50% increase of PreK - Grade 5 parents attending school-level parent-related activities and workshop as measured by signed attendance sheets. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Encourage parents to complete in-house surveys in order to assess and address their needs. Based on the results of the survey, invite community and business leaders to address the needs of the school community and take necessary action. Parents School Staff October 2018 - May 2019 On-going Community Outreach: Invite community and business leaders/volunteers to come together to determine the needs of the school community, establish a plan of action, and put the plan of action to work. For example, Career Day: participate and educate students on various careers and skills. Contract: Review and uphold Title I Parent Compact and Parent Involvement Policy which outline how parents and school personnel will be responsible for supporting student achievement. Conduct Literacy and Math workshops where parents are Parents provided with materials and training to help parents work with their children to increase their achievement levels (including City and State standards). Volunteers: Parents will be invited and encouraged to volunteer their time and services. (For example: Secret Reader, Dance Festival (Pre-K and Grade 1), Multicultural Day (Grades 2-5), Talent Show, Pajama Read Aloud, Movie Night, Class/School Performances, Sports Day, Family Carnival Night, Computer Classes to instruct parents on Internet usage, Author Celebrations, Math Jeopardy, Exercise/Dance Classes and Lunchroom Assistance.  Invite and encourage parents to come in and share their knowledge about college, careers and culture. Parents School Staff School Staff October 2018 - May 2019 On-going October 2018 -May 2019 On-going 7  Decision Making: Parents will make important decisions about Parents our school by participating in PTA, school-wide committee meetings, providing feedback/ suggestions/comments during parent activities and/or in a suggestion box located at the School Staff, SLT, PTA October 2018 - May 2019 On-going school. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Administrators  UFT Teacher Center Staff  ESL Teacher & SBST Team  AIS Support Staff  Materials Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Midpoint Benchmarks: By February 2019, based on signed attendance sheets, the average attendance at parent-related activities or events will be at least 20 Pre-K - Grade 5 participants. Parent Coordinator, PTA Executive Board, and Administration will monitor the number of participants attending school level events and activities. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Instrument of Measure : Attendance sheets. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students who were retained, students who are 6 or more months below grade level Mathematics Students in Grades K-5 who are not meeting the benchmarks Grade 3-5 students who scored Levels 1 & 2 on the NYS tests Science Social Studies Classroom observations Classwork Classroom observations Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Fundations- Phonemic Awareness Skills - Kindergarten-Grade 2 RIGBY – Special Education Teacher Support Services students - Grades 2 -5 Reading for Comprehension Readiness – Kindergarten and Grade 1 Mathematics Skills, Concepts and Problem Solving – Kindergarten - Grade5 Targeted Mathematics Intervention – Grades 2-5 Science, Harcourt Science – Kindergarten – Grade 5 Social Studies Scope and Sequence Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small Group-pull out/push in During the school day AIS pull-out support in Grades K-2 Grades 3-5 small group after-school ELA Instruction Small Group-pull out/push in During the school day AIS pull-out support in Grades K-2 Grades 3-5 small group after-school Math Instruction Small Group – flexible grouping – K-5 During the school day Small Group – flexible grouping – K-5 During the school day 9  Classwork At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Interactions with staff members and students Harcourt Social Studies Curriculum (Grades K -2) Scholastic News (Grade 1) Passport Scholastic News: Let's Find Out (Kindergarten) New World Studies Weekly (Grade 5) Social Students Content-related Trade Books - Grades 3-5 Functional Behavioral Assessments and Behavior Intervention Plans are developed as needed – Provided by the Social Worker, Speech Teacher and Guidance Counselor During school day – small group and 1:1 sessions Asthma Class provided by the nurse Small Group and 1:1 sessions During the school day 0  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Our school has approximately 56 students who are in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students will be invited to attend any after school programs that are offered by the school. Students will receive instructional supplies, and school attire, if needed. Students will be invited to attend school field trips at a low or no cost. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 1  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 1 The payroll secretary will work closely with the HR point to ensure that non-HQT meet all required documentation and assessment deadlines; New teacher orientation with administration 2 Administrative staff attends hiring fairs to identify and recruit highly-qualified teachers 3 Communicate clear and precise school goals and expectations 4 Present a school climate that is inviting; open-door policy with supervisors 5 Provide in-house opportunity for promotions so as to motivate teachers to become qualified 6 Provide support for teachers through mentoring system, buddy teachers, PD, and intra-visitation 7 Listen willingly to ideas and suggestions that would enhance students’ performance 8 Assign mentors to support struggling and un-qualified teachers 9 Assign mentors to support new teachers; Buddy Teachers, Grade Level Meetings, Staff will be supported by internal and external coaches (math and literacy coach, data specialist and literacy consultant) 10 Ensure recruited teachers are appropriately certified and highly qualified teachers, with some limited flexibility, consistent with State regulations. 11 Principal will work closely with Human Resources and follow the policies set forth by the DOE to ensure that the selection of highly qualified teachers follows the guidelines set by the NYS Education Department. 12 The Principal, in collaboration with Human Resources, will work to identify qualified teachers through major recruitment campaigns, hiring halls and through relationships with Colleges and Universities . 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development 3  Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). 1. Training and Professional Development for staff- At P.S. 135 the school provides professional development in the areas indicated by the needs assessment of the staff and students. 2. Professional development will take place on days as prescribed by the DOE guidelines and the Chancellor’s designated Conference Days 3. Professional Development will be conducted in-house once a week, district-wide to support teachers and empower them to employ best teaching practices to enable all children to meet the Common Core Learning Standards 4. Empower teachers by encouraging them to conduct workshops 5. Conduct needs assessment survey and provide PD for teachers 6. Provide professional development in the areas indicated by the academic needs of the students Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). 1 The Parent Coordinator in collaboration with classroom teachers and social workers, plans a series of workshops to enlighten parents of the expectations of kindergarten students. 2 School ensures students begin their academic career with a strong start and emphasizes the importance of early childhood education. 3 School provides an aligned curriculum to early childhood programs to provide a coherent and seamless instructional transition to elementary school-wide programs. 4  4 School implements a coherent and seamless education program for at-risk students by ensuring the successful transition from early childhood programs to elementary school-wide programs. 5 School provides joint PD and parent involvement activities to families in the transition from early childhood programs to the elementary school program. 6 School shares records and information from early childhood programs to ensure seamless transition to elementary school programs. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 1 School provides ongoing professional development to all teachers in analyzing assessment data to increase teachers’ understanding of student performance and strengthen teachers’ practices. 2 School provides ongoing differentiated professional development regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 3 School community agreed upon and selected the appropriate multiple assessment measures to be implemented. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Federal 434,537.00 114,049.00 X X 5 Column B Section Reference(s) CEPOverview, Sections 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, & 5E, Section 6, Section 7 CEPOverview, Sections 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, & 5E, Section 6, Section 7  Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal 0 0 Tax Levy (FSF) Local 6,920,738.00 X CEPOverview, Sections 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, & 5E, Section 6, Section 7 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-6  quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 7  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 135, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 135 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● engaging and supporting families in understanding Common Core rigorous instruction; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 8  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 9  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events such as Pajamas Read Aloud, Math Night; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● encouraging parents to come in and share their knowledge about college, career, and culture; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) 0  P.S. 135 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● notifying parents of their children's attendance status and other school-related activities; 1  ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; 2  ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities 3  ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 4  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 5  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The rationale for this program is to provide foundational skills for ENL students in order to help them achieve grade level standards and to excel academically. The population will be kindergarten, first grade, and second grade English Language Learners. They will be provided with 2 hours of instruction each week on Thursdays in English from 2:30 to 4:30 p.m. by one teacher certified in English as a New Language. The program will begin on November 29, 2018 and last until February 28, 2018. The materials will include texts for English as a New Language such as Language Power K-2, Great Leaps, glossary of words from the children’s home languages, and English Dictionaries. Number of Students: 22 Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: In order to serve students who are new to this country and who speak a different language, it is very important that teachers and other providers are properly equipped with the skills and tools to do so. A significant part of this is dependent on the professional development that is extended or made available to these providers. Teachers and other providers will be provided with three hours of professional development before the program begins in best practices in teaching ELL students. Topics to be covered will include instructional strategies that support ELL students, comprehensible input techniques, the importance of connecting content to background knowledge, respect and integration of languages and cultures, connecting content instruction with language instruction, and empowering linguistic knowledge. Pre-service preparation provides basic competency in instructing ELLs. In-service professional development is in-depth and ongoing and emphasizes ENL/mainstream teacher collaboration and Professional development programs build the capabilities of paraprofessionals, particularly of bilingual paraprofessionals. Dates of Professional Development: November 26, 2018 Provider: Teacher with Responsibility for Immigrant Students /ENL 6  Part C: Professional Development Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Children are best served when the parents are able to participate and become their support and facilitators. Opportunities will be provided for family engagement in the following areas and dates: These workshops will be provided by the ENL Teacher and the Parent Coordinator. Parents will be notified of the events through a flyer and/or the school newsletter. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel 7 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Other TOTAL 8  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 18 School Name Sheldon A. Brookner Borough Brooklyn School Number 135 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Trevlyn McRae Coach Jacqueline Sylvan, Literacy ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Cindy Alexandre Teacher/Subject Area Peter Forgenie, Assessment Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Carlene Hewitt Superintendent Beverly Wilkins Assistant Principal Joy Abrams (I.A) Coach type here School Counselor Lisa Sher Parent Judine Valery Parent Coordinator Pamela Wilson (LAC) Field Support Center Staff Member JoAnn Benoit Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 9  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 548 Total number of ELLs 57 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 10.40% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use Fountas and Pinnell to monitor the progress of the ELLs in reading and comprehension. From the assessment and date this helps with instructional planning. The ELLs are also given the opportunity to confer with their teachers. The data indicates that most of the kindergartens on independent reading levels are above level. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Weekly planning with classroom teachers on different grade level. Look at data to guide instructions then re-assess. Working on a one to one and keeping notes on what the child learned and what the next step will be (conferring). 0  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Periodic assessments enable us to determine the strengths and weaknesses of each student. They allow teachers to identify visual and auditory learners. With this knowledge, teachers create differentiated lessons that address the needs of each student. We also use Curriculum Maps which are incorporated in our new ELA program (Ready Gen) and our new Mathematics program (Go Math). ELL's progress in Listening, Speaking, Reading and Writing is measured. In addition, teachers of ELLs meet regularly to address the needs of each individual student. The success of our programs is evaluated through an examination of the NYSESLAT and NYS ELA assessments. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Differentiation of instructions, providing intense guided reading for 6 weeks then re-assess, having frequent meetings with classroom teacher, classroom teacher will meet with student at least 3 times a week and work on specific reading or writing skills, and providing the student with reading books 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] At P.S 135 the ELLs demonstrate learning through technical/digital proficiency, in areas including but not limited to maintenance of an electronic portfolio, or learning log, research on the Internet and the use of computers.With the use of RTI model P.S. 135's goal is to build on more effective individualized instructional programs. Beyond screening and identification for ENL services to support language development, the ELL student takes part in the RTI screening to assess whether his/her literacy skills and competencies are meeting grade level benchmarks. If the student is flagged as at-risk or below the grade level benchmark, the student will receive target instructional support to develop in the specific content area. P.S. 135 use Fountas & Pinnell and ReadyGen Assessments as the baseline ELA assessment tool for all grades. Besides an informal interview, NYSITELL is used solely for non-English speakers. Periodic assessments are used throughout the year to enable us to determine the strengths and weaknesses of each student. We also look at the number of years the ELL student was instructed in English as a new language program, English and home language literacy, and English and home language literacy needs of long-term ELLs. School also looks at the annual English Language Proficiency assessment exam, recommendations from ENL teacher as well as student's work. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Data patterns indicate the NYSESLAT scores show in grade 1 one student is on Emerging, two on Transitioning, four on Expanding, and three on Commanding. In grade 2 three are on Emerging, four on Transitioning, and two on Expanding. In grade 3 there is one Entering Level, four Emerging, two Transitioning, and three Expanding. In grade 4 there is one Entering Level, one Emerging, and three Expanding. In grade 5 there are two Emerging, one Transitioning, two Expanding, and one Commanding. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? After reviewing the NYSESLAT results, ELA, and Math results the ENL teacher then groups the students homogeneously (proficiency level, modalities are the same in one class and mixed grades) and heterogeneous (mixed proficiency level, modalities and mixed grades). As the student make progress through the year they will change groups. Students are either in the same grade, one grade above or one grade below) Part IV: ELL Programming 1  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. a. Instruction at P.S 135 is delivered by a pull out model. b. The program model consists of the ELLs grouped heterogeneous (mixed proficiency levels) and mixed grades. Group 1 (K and 1 st grades) Group 2 (2 nd , 3rd and 4 th grades) Group 3 (3 rd, 4 th and 5 th grades) Group 4 (2nd and 3rd) b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The ELLs receive the necessary ENL and ELA instructional units as required by Commissioners Regulation's Part 154. The English Proficiency as per score on the NYSESLAT or NYSITELL: Beginners (entering) ELLs receive 360 minutes per week of ENL instruction. Students will receive 180 minutes of standalone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA) Low Intermediate (emerging) ELLs receive 360 minutes per week of ENL instruction. Students will receive 90 minutes of standalone ENL, 180 minutes of integrated ENL and 90 minutes of standalone or integrated ENL with ELA or any other content area). Intermediate (transitioning) receive 180 minutes per week of ENL instructions. Students will receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA and 90 minutes of standalone or integrated ENL with ELA or any other content area. Advanced (expanding) ELLs receive 180 minutes per week of Integrated ENL/ELA or other content area instructions. Proficient (commanding) receive 90 minutes per week of ELA instruction. Students will receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELAor other content area). All ELLs receive the required minutes of ENL instruction in "equal daily allotment" as per CR Part 154 Regulations. This will be the student weekly time requirements for ENL. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Targeted and differentiation of instruction is used in all subject areas to ensure that all learners are reached. School leadership and teachers use the results of the Periodic Assessments to drive instruction. Instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible and to enrich language development include strong cognitive involvement, as well as contextual support. Language in the content areas is amplified. Teachers continue to emphasize the use of “scaffolding strategies” for all ELL subgroups. These include: bridging, modeling, contextualization, meta-cognitive development and text re-presentation. Educators at P.S 135 combine the principles of second language learning with the language development 2  necessary for success in content area classes. This allows students to learn content area material while simultaneously developing English skills. Proficiency in the English language is essential in order to meet the Common Core Learning Standards in academic content areas. This is the explicit goal of the school leadership and teachers of our school. Teachers of ELLs at P.S. 135 utilize in the Ready Gen series which includes textbooks, student workbooks with original stories, poetry, reading comprehension activities and assessment guides. For Mathematics Go Math is used. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Since this is a free standing English as a New Language program, P.S 135 does not evaluate the native language of the ELLs but if we did have TBF/DL programs the ELLs would be evaluated and assessed with native language exams in their language, Haitian Creole, Spanish, French, Bengali, and Arabic. They take the content exams in their language. Language support is provided. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Instruction is designed to mediate the learning of various of proficiency classifications? a. The instructional plan for SIFE is for these students to receive rigorous grade instruction in all content areas taught in English. These students will also attend the extended day program 3 times a week receiving literacy instruction and target mathematics intervention. The SIFE ELLs will also receive AIS which provides targeted instruction in listening, speaking, reading, and writing. Materials used: Go Math, ReadyGen b. The plan for newcomers (less than 3 years) is to ensure that they meet state standards, P.S 135 will utilize many different strategies and activities to ensure that ELLs learn their new language. Materials used: Go Math, ReadyGen, and Language Power c. The plan for ELLs receiving service 4 to 6 years will be balanced literacy ( guided/ shared reading, guided/ shared writing) and content area instruction, the extended day program 3 days a week. Materials used: Go Math, ReadyGen, and Language Power d. The plan for long term ELLs (completed 6+years) will be balanced literacy ( guided/shared reading, guided shared writing) and content area of instruction extended day 3 days, AIS, target instruction in Math and ELA. Referrals if needed for long term ELLs, summer school and counseling are based on their individual needs. e. The plan for former ELLs ( in years 1 and 2 after testing proficient) are to be offered 90 minutes of ENL services, and to receive modified time on state testing for 2 years. Former ELLs up to 2 years after they are identified as proficient are able to continue to be in a separate location and allowed modified time on all state tests. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The instructional plan for ELLs SWDs is to provide then with sheltered instruction which includes visual aids, hands on materials charts, graphics puppets, big books, computer instructional programs and books with tapes. Materials used Go Math and Ready Jen. P.S. 3  135 ensures ELL-SWD receive all services mandated on their IEP’s, by the numbers of different instructional strategies and grade level materials that are used for reading intervention. When using Intervention by Design, the ELL-SWD uses the ENL book that comes with the kit when working with guided reading activities. When working in math ELLs are provided with appropriate manipulative from that topic. The ELL-SWD is provided with many chances to learn by visual methods. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? For students in 12:1:1 classes (self-contained special education) lessons are planned and taught based on the recommendations on the students’ IEPs. Many of the educational activities are taught individually or in small groups. Interactive groups allow students to take on different assignments to complete the assigned tasks. There is a lot of flexibility in timing for most activities in which these students engage. Students who take the NYS assessment exams receive extended time as per their IEP. They are entitled to take the exams in English and/or their native language. If the exam is not available in their native language, they are entitled to oral translations which are provided. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Target intervention programs for ELLs are the Wilson Program and Read 180. General ELLs on the testing grade attend this program. Content based subjects such as Science and Social Studies through literature which is non-fiction. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? The improvements for the upcoming school year is to continue using the Common Core Learning Standards. In addition, Language Power, Phonics for the Real World for ELLs program will be utilized. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? At PS 135 we currently have the Freestanding English as a New/Second Language. No program/Service will be discontinued for ELLs since ELLs are moving up levels after assessment and some ELLs are becoming proficient. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are included in all programs during and after school. ELLs are invited to any after school programs or enrichment programs. They are invited to Project Arts which is for Band and Dance, Boy Scout. Flyers are sent home in the parent’s native language for permission. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 4  The ELLs are using Read 180 with the use of laptops. The ELLs are using Rigby Intervention by Design this is a differentiated program. The ELLs are tested first and them the teacher teaches them on their level. Native language support will be classroom dictionaries in the native language, class library areas clearly defined by language. There is adequate implementation of the core curriculum in all content areas in both languages. ELLs are using technology to develop their reading, math and content area skills. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support (Bengali, Haitian Creole, Spanish) is delivered through staff members, other students on the grade/class that speak the language of the ELLs to support and help them. Dictionaries, glossaries, and bilingual books in the library are also helpful. At PS 135 parents provide support in Arabic. The translation/interpretation unit services is also utilized when needed. There is no TBE or Dual language programs at PS 135. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All Services are provided for ELLs on grade levels such as guidance counselors, speech teachers SETTS. When needed native language support will be provided. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The ELLs are using Read 180 with the use of laptops. The ELLs are using Rigby Intervention by Design this is a differentiated program. The ELLs are tested first and them the teacher teaches them on their level. Native language support will be classroom dictionaries in the native language, class library areas clearly defined by language. There is adequate implementation of the core curriculum in all content areas in both languages. ELLs are using technology to develop their reading, math and content area skills. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). The principal gives tours of the school such as showing the lunchroom, the library, the auditorium, laboratories, outdoor, and indoor line up. Throughout the years as ELLs arrive: The ELL teachers should make the newly enrolled ELL a member of the class by introductions to other ELLs , buddy system for native language support, show different areas of the classroom ( library, charts). The parent coordinator coordinates workshops and English classes for the parents. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? There are no language electives offered at P.S 135. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. 5  In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 1. Teachers must hold the appropriate teaching certification. Teachers plan for the development of both social and academic language. Teachers model academic language and consistently special language so that student language proficiency grows increasingly more complex. Language functions, Language structure PD • Creating a Unit Plan for Literacy K-5 • Creating Unit Plan for Literacy • Structure of ReadyGen Program K-5 • Revised Literacy Curriculum Map to reflect ReadyGen-Unit 1 –Skills and Strategies. • Revised Math Curriculum map to Reflect GO Math-Skills and concepts- Unit 1 K-5 • Questions and Discussion Techniques component 3B grades K-5 All teachers will participate in at least 15% of PD related to ELL. Teachers will attend Professional Development session on the following topics: Small group instructions, guided reading for ELLs groups NYSESLAT. The parent coordinator will help the parents of the ELLs by providing appropriate letters in their native language; help the ENL teacher with the parent orientation meeting. Provide the parents with information of the school with native language support. Guidance counselors will provide ELLs, long term ELLs and SIFE group counseling or individual counseling based on their individual needs or conflict resolution skills. The secretaries make sure that the parents of the ELLs receive the correct HLIS (Home Language Identification Survey Form) in their appropriate language. Guidance counselors will provide ELLs SIFE and long term ELLs group counseling or individual counseling based on their individual needs or conflict resolution skills. Classroom teachers and the ENL teacher will have targeted instruction for ELLs, SIFE, and long term ELLs by providing for ELA, math, and ENL. The SETTS teacher will provide targeted instruction in listening, reading, speaking, and writing. The secretary notifies the ENL Teacher of a possible new ELL and the secretary gives the parent all of the necessary information (sometimes through a translator) about school procedures , meetings, uniforms, bus information, arrivals, and dismissal time, lunch schedules for the ELLs. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The ELLs will obtain support such as meeting with the guidance counselor to discuss the different types of middle schools program and activities available to them when they transition from P.S. 135 to the middle school. There will be meeting with parents about middle school. ELLs will take some walk-through to middle schools to become familiar with the schools procedures, setting, and expectations. The guidance counselor has meetings with the 5th grade ELLs to discuss their future in middle schools through career choices. A Career Day is held where actual workers (lawyers, dentists, accountants, artist, etc) share and discuss their occupations. ELLs are asked to discuss the occupation of their choice and articulate by asking questions. Teachers will attend at least 15% of the required Departmental Professional Development sessions on the following 6  topics: Creating Connections Building Bridges, Developing Communication with ELL Children for Teachers and Parents, Cooperative Learning Strategies for ELL Students, Test Taking Strategies, etc. Professional development for all teachers will be on language acquisition, with a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrated language and content instruction for English language learners. For the ENL teacher 50% of required PD hours will be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction. Additional Professional Development is also delivered during weekly professional development session. Teachers are asked to sign in at all Professional Development sessions. These lists are kept on file in the school. Teachers are afforded the opportunity to take courses listed in OELL Opportunities website, and for those who are in school, they are encouraged to take some form of education course which addresses the needs of the English Language Learner. In addition, there is in-class assistance to support teacher knowledge and instructional strategies. Articulation is ongoing through individual meetings and grade conferences. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents are involved in various committees including Parent Teacher Association, School Leadership Team and the Parent Advisory Council. Parents are encouraged to participate in school activities, assemblies and field trips. All parents’ correspondence including flyers and other communications are translated into a variety of languages spoken by our multilingual families. Translations are available for languages such as Bengali, Arabic, Haitian Creole, Spanish and French. In addition, the school schedules individual parent meetings other than Parent Teacher Conferences to discuss their child's language development, assessment results and language development needed in all content area. There are staff members who speak a few of the languages other than English. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. All parents of ELLs are invited to participate in Curriculum Night during the month of September. At this time ELL parents are informed about school expectations, assessments state standards and the ENL Program. Parents are also invited to Curriculum night in May to discuss academic progress, next steps and end of the year procedures. At P.S. 135 there are many ways that involves the parent community including the parents of ELLs. The parent Coordinator will have a workshop sharing information about how parents can go online and gain access to see their child’s grades and monitor attendance of their child. Parents are informed and given the phone number to Dial-A-Teacher for homework assisstance. There is an English class offered 3 times a week for parents.There is a workshop for parents in the testing grades (3rd, 4th, and 5th) to discuss the upcoming ELA and Math State Test. There is Pajama Read Aloud Night where the students come in their pajamas and are read to by some of the staff members. There is also Movie Night, Family Night where families gather to meet other families to discuss school matters. Parents of children identified as an ELL are invited to all workshops. Parents are invited to chaperone on school trips. We meet the needs of parents who need translation through the use of all in house staff who speaks the same language of ELLs or by the translation / interpretation Unit services. 7  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 8 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Trevlyn Mcrae, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 9  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Sheldon A. Brookner School DBN: 18K135 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Trevlyn McRae Title Principal Leighton Jackson (I.A) Assistant Principal Pamela Wilson Parent Coordinator Magdalena Gilaard ENL/Bilingual Teacher Judine Valery Parent Peter Forgenie (Assessment) Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Jacqueline Sylvan (Literacy) Coach Lisa Sher Beverly Wilkins JoAnn Benoit Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 0  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 18K135 School Name: Sheldon A. Brookner Superintendent: Beverly Wilkins The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary)Pamela Wilson Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. There are a number of ways in which our school assesses the written translation and oral interpretation needs of our parents to ensure that all parents are provided with appropriate and timely information in a language they can understand. • One method of assessment is through the HLIS (Home Language Identification Survey), which all parents of new admissions to the school are required to complete during the registration process. The HLIS is printed in a variety of languages and the parent will receive the language of choice for proper completion. Our in-house staff interpreters are called upon during the registration process. 1  At our school, we use the interpretation unit of the Department of Education for other languages spoken by our parents. Parents are also given written translation and oral interpretation in their respected languages. • Another method of assessment is the ATS system that provides information of the primary language of the students (RHLA). • The Parent Coordinator at our school is another resource for determining the needs of parents. Calls are made to the students’ homes and an assessment can be made as to the need for translation and oral interpretation to better understand an issue. • Informal oral communication with parents and teachers also helps us determine the need for on staff interpreters or the need for an interpretation unit. • Finally attendance at PTA meetings, and through parent conversations and requests, we establish lines of communication ensuring that parents are aware and fully understand what is happening in their child’s academic development. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral At our school, the following languages are identified: Arabic, Haitian Creole, Vietnamese, French, Bengali and Spanish. 95% English, Arabic, Haitian Creole, Vietnamese, French, Bengali and Spanish English, Arabic, Haitian Creole, Spanish 95% na na na na na na na na na na na na na na na 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. !% Vietnamese Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 2  1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families All parental correspondence, (letters, notices, flyers, permission slips, consent forms and parent handbooks) will be translated by the school These documents are distributed to parents at the beginning of the school year. Other notices will be distributed to families throughout the school year. staff or the Translation and Interpretation Unit, from English to the native languages of the students. (Arabic, Vietnamese, Haitian Creole, Bengali, French and Spanish). Our School will translate documents that contain individual student specific information including a student’s health, legal or disciplinary matters, entitlement to public education or placement in any special education, English language learner or non-standard academic programs. na na na na na na Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Our school will translate individual student specific information including a student's health, legal or disciplinary matters, entitlement to public education or placement in any special education, English Language Learner or non-standard academic programs by a DOE employed translator and by school staff. Our school will post multilingual posters that provide parents with information for services in their native language. na na na 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Our school will have Parent Teacher Conferences (Nov., March & May), Curriculum Night (Sept. & May), engaged in parent engagement (Weekly) to discuss student academic progress and language development . September and May (Curriculum night) November, March, May - Parent Teacher Conferences interpretation service(s)? Our school will contact the DOE to provide interpretation services to parents whose primary language is a covered language and who requests such services to be able to communicate with school staff. Our school will also utilize staff members to provide interpretation services to parents. na na na na na na na na na 3  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Our school's communication strategy to reach limited-English-proficient families in the event of a school emergency is to inform parents in September, during Curriculum night, the procedures this school has in place in case of an emergency, and by sending home flyers in their native language. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Our school ensures that staff members are aware of the goals of Chancellor's Regulation A-663 by attending training on the language access requirements that are in the regulation and on resources available to support these requirements. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Our school will fulfill Section VII of the Chancellor’s Regulations A-663 regarding parental notification requirements for translation and interpretation services. We will translate letters and notices to parents in the appropriate languages for our school – Arabic, Vietnamese, French, Haitian Creole and Spanish. For translations in any other language we will use the services of the NYC DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit since we have no staff member who can do that. For the translations of French, Haitian Creole and Spanish, we will use our in-house staff to provide translations. For translations of Arabic and Vietnamese, we will use the Translation and Interpretation Unit. We will translate and provide translations as they arise. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our school will use parent survey to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services. Monitoring of Multilingual Welcome poster. 4  5 
