2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 15K136 School Name: I.S. 136 CHARLES O. DEWEY Principal: ERIC SACKLER 2018-19 SCEP-P 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 9: Title I Program Information Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-P 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Charles O. Dewey 331500010136 6, 7, 8 School Number (DBN): 15K136 4004 4 th Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11232 (718) 840-1950 (718) 840-1955 Phone Number: Damaris Garcia, PC Fax: DGarcia11@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 15 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Eric R. Sackler C. Walsh Aurora Rodriguez Claire Walsh Yieme Osario tbd n/a District Information Anita Skop Superintendent: 131 Livingston Street ASkop@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 935-4317 Phone Number: (718) 935-4356 Fax: Brooklyn north FSC: Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: Bernadette Fitzgerald 2018-19 SCEP-P 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, NY BFitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-3954 Phone Number: 718-935-4330 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-P 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Eric R. Sackler, Principal / Staff C. Walsh Chapter Leader /Staff Aurora Rodriguez/ /Parent Lillian Lopez- Staff Yeime Osorio- Parent n/a n/a *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Maria Elizabeth Gomez- Parent Oscar Ramirez - Parent Ruth Meneses- Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent 2018-19 SCEP-P 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Lindsey Smith - Staff Danielle Siegel - Staff Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ UFT Member/UFT Member/ UFT Member/ DC37 Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-P 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 SCEP-P 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: 2018-19 SCEP-P 8  Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you 2018-19 SCEP-P 9  monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-P 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The schools mission statement is "Inspiring Young Minds Today, Empowering Leaders For Tomorrow." This was developed with input from all stakeholders. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The SCEP was created in conjunction with the following stakeholders: principal, assistant principals, SLT, data specialists, lead teacher, teachers, student and teacher lighthouse team, and parents. Our school community is approximately 81% Latino, 8% Asian, and 8% Arabic/White. 3 % identify themselves as African American or other. It is a community in flux. Slowly transitioning through gentrification while still being a transient neighborhood where many of the residents are from single parent or no parent homes and are undocumented. Process used to collect multiple perspectives and individuals involved and their roles In August 2016 and then again in June 2017, the administration cabinet analyzed 2015-2016 school year’s item analysis of all state exams, curricula and assessments with lead teachers to come up with a needs assessment in three core areas for our community population. The three core areas are academic, personal leadership/social-emotional/21st college-career, and culture of leadership/school/family/community. Then, as an administrative cabinet, five major W.I.G.S (widely important goals) cyclical goals which directly impact our progress emerged from the data. Academic: We noticed that students across grade levels in ELA/ESL/SS can pull out evidence but are still having trouble supporting their claim. Based on this information these departments are using the NYS CC 6-8 writing rubric as a formative assessment on writing samples, and document based questions. For math, the department looked at the base level for the 6-8th grade CC math curricula, and noted that students lacked basic multiplication, percent, decimal, fraction, and integer skills which is the basis for the core curricula. Therefore shifting the core curricula based on the item analysis to increasing students that are emerging on the NYS math and ELA exams by 10-20% (tracked through core department W.I.G.S) Personal Leadership: Based on 2015-2016 Quality Snapshots student attendance was at 94% for the year. Teacher attendance was at 97% for the year. We want to raise the attendance for students to 95% attendance throughout the year (tracked monthly). Disciplinary infractions has been reduced by 60% from June 2012 (143) to June 2013 (87) to June 2014 (57). We are in the process of analyzing updated data. Our goal is to increase the number of students consistently living above the line (positively) on a daily basis by having a unified message through the building based on 7 Habits language and the Leader in Me process (keep the number at 95% tracked monthly). By June 2016-2017, Student attendance remained at 94% for the year and continued to hold for the 2017-2018 school year at 94% in June, 2018. Our “Live Above the Line” protocol for all students allowed us to sustain 95% of our student population at or above without discipline referrals for the 2018-2019 school years. 2018-19 SCEP-P 11  Cultural Leadership: Increase parent involvement at PTA meetings (where CC curricula and the paradigm shift at the school are taught and discussed) (tracked monthly except for January and April when there were no parent events). Based on the 2016-2017 Quality snapshot, parents responded on the school survey that they are 100% satisfied with the education at MS136. For the 2016-2017 school year, we had an increase by 20% of parent input and attendance at school functions throughout the year. For the 2017-2018, we had an increase by 75% of parent input and attendance with student led conferences (held twice a year), three functions beyond mandated doe nights, Leader in Me parent Saturdays and PTA meetings with a solid 25-30 parents attending on a monthly basis, and 50% of our ENL parent population in on Tuesdays for Language Proficiency Meetings. Departments then created specific, measurable W.I.G.S which are then aligned to the five school wide goals under the three core areas. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Large ELL and Special needs population 41% and 26%. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The administrative cabinet also reviewed areas of weakness in our staff’s 2016-2017 MOTP as our focus lens for October to November. Based on our findings and the changes to UFT contracted components we are to review on, we have narrowed our focus lens to 3d (overall average from last year to be 3.0), 3b (overall rating to be 3.01), and 3c (overall rating to be 3.09). Therefore, our professional development and school wide W.I.G.S are around engagement, evaluating questioning and discussions (key terms Justify, evaluate, evidence, along with Language objectives in all lessons), and DDI (focus on tuning protocols, Gantt charts, and unified departmental assessments to drive instruction.). These domains are still an area of focus for the rest of the year. Each year (2016-2017, 2017-2018) the departmental W.I.G.S are adapted based on student work and progress made through reflection and needs of individual students. On-going monthly process: The administrative cabinet reviewed with the instructional teams to discuss process and next steps within each department. After careful review of the DTSDE feedback and Quality Review (QR) rubric, NYS Item Analysis, baseline assessments, and student leadership notebooks to evaluate student academic goals to see if they align with departmental W.I.G.S., school wide W.I.G.S., and the school’s data. Each department then identifies and shifts bulleted activities that exist at our school to further drive instructional practices. As the year progresses, the administrative cabinet (along with lead teachers and project arts liaison) review the Advance Teacher Level MOTP Detail to track our findings each marking period (Sep-Nov, Dec-Feb, Mar-May, ending with June (to set summer PD and next steps)) to revise focus lens and tailor whole staff/individual professional development to improve on teacher practice and student progress. These cabinet meetings fall after the monthly departmental W.I.G.s analysis and tracking meetings to see where we may need to adjust our process. Observation schedule and frequency is often adjusted to meet the needs of staff based upon what has been seen or analysis of results. Professional Learning provided based upon observable need or request. 2018-19 SCEP-P 12  Departmental teams identified and refined instructional and assessment practices throughout the school community. Consequently, all staff members produced evidence for the five (5) quality statements: 1.1 – Curricula; 1.2 – Pedagogy; 2.2 – Assessment; 3.4 - High Expectations; 4.2 - Teacher Teams. The established teams collaboratively analyzed the DTSDE feedback and the QR rubric during a series of professional learning workshops. The completed SCEP was brought before the staff -including parents along with the rest of the team were able to give feedback for possible revisions. In addition, the assistant principal spoke to parents at PA meetings about the school to gather their input for the SCEP. This information, along with the students on the Lighthouse Team were asked to share their insight, their questions concerning the curriculum, instruction, assessments, and overall school expectations. Through these discussions and meetings, the students decided to come up with action teams and a gantt with work templates and next steps that are then discussed at the teen talk meetings with the principal. The parents and the student representative voices were incorporated into the document. The final SCEP was electronically shared with the PTA, SLT, staff, and student lighthouse team. 2018-19 SCEP-P 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 15K136 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 485 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 47 45 10 2 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 47 44 5 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 97.0% % Attendance Rate 94.2% % Reduced Lunch 39.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.2% 81.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 8.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 11.78 0% 7% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 21.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO YES NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO NO NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A NO NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 43 45 93.7% 2.9% 23.1% 2.7% 7.6% 0.4% 4 20% 9.2 14.4% 27% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A NO NO N/A YES N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-P 14  2018-19 SCEP-P 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed x x x x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. • Teachers use Common Core aligned tasks and assessments at the grade and departmental level • The school analyzes state summative assessments in Math and ELA as well as NYSESLAT assessment for ELLs to determine trends in data to identify student needs • Monthly assessments in ELA and Math measure growth towards school wide goals. • Rubrics based assessments are used to track growth and provide actionable feedback for students. • Extensive formative assessments are used routinely in all departments as checks for understanding to inform instruction at the classroom level. • Ongoing formative and summative assessments are not as fully developed in all contents areas. Students are not aware of next steps in all subject areas, thus impeding them on overall academic progress. Train staff in systems that provide regular and explicit feedback to students. 2018-19 SCEP-P 16  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019 100 percent of students will be tracked in all subject areas using a unified form of progress monitoring resulting in improvements in student work products and growth as evidenced by grades and assessment results 2018-19 SCEP-P 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). - Continue to reflect on the impact of targeted instruction and adaptations to core curriculum that we’ve made to the modules and how the instructional shifts are in the classroom. Redesign the plan, and track as an ongoing (focus lens on the W.I.G.S.), repetitive process. - Student set and track individual academic goals in all core content areas - Encourage more inter-visitation to see specific strategies in use, especially those that can help meet students language or learning needs Professional development for targeted staff/department level to address, evaluate, and create a unified method for assessment. This will foster increase trust between staff, students and administration. The school will host a variety of events to increase parental involvement and engagement with regards to rigorous instruction at the school: -PTA meetings will include a portion of time dedicated toward parent education in the leadership model at the school. Continue with a Saturday program of adult education and social/emotional learning reinforcement. This will reinforce the important shifts in the core beliefs on leadership as well as inform parents of critical information as we continue implementation CCLS Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Principal, asst. principals, coach/lead teachers, lighthouse team, Student Light House Team, Students ENLS, Special Education students, lower 1/3, cusp students bordering 2-3, 1-2 on state exams Start August, 2018. Instructional Focus firmed up nlt October, 2018. Ongoing through 6/19 Principal, asst. principals, coach/lead teachers, lighthouse team, Brooklyn North Support Staff Principal, asst. principals, coach/lead teachers, lighthouse team, PTA, parents ENLS, Special Education students, lower 1/3, cusp students bordering 2-3, 1-2 on state exams ENLS, Special Education students, lower 1/3, cusp students bordering 2-3, 1-2 on state exams .Start August, 2018. Instructional Focus created by October, 2018. Ongoing through June 2019. Start August, 2018 Instructional Focus created by October, 2018. Ongoing through June 2019 2018-19 SCEP-P 18  -Parent Involvement Night (an outreach event at the school to inspire and empower parents to be more involved in their child’s education Develop school wide tools for tracking student goals and accomplishments -Family Science Night -International Night -Student led conferences (where students participate actively in Informing parents of their successes and progress toward their academic and personal goals. These events will increase communication and trust between all members of the school community. - Department meetings, grade team meetings as well as whole staff professional development activities are dedicated to establishing norms and protocols to ensure that an environment of trust is indeed established. Norms established provide teachers with the security that information presented and work being done is transparent and free of hidden agendas. The Leadership model at the school has established a core belief that all individuals are valued for their potential at the school. As a result of this paradigm shift in the culture of leadership at the school, teachers are compelled to participate in reflection, curriculum design, sharing of pedagogical expertise as well as taking on leadership roles at the school including after school activities and school wide functions. With the element of trust being established at the school, the following action items can be met with a high level of efficacy: -professional development for staff and students around student-led conferences. - Modify a variety of school reform Protocols and Japanese lesson studies to analyze pre and post assessment results from a particular unit in each department when tracking our W.I.G.S as the year progresses -For departments with a spiral curriculum, continue to review post assessment for each unit/grade to ensure alignment of key concepts, terms, and skill sets for the follow year’s scope and sequence for depth of knowledge (science, social studies and technology). -Schedule for set grade level meetings , beyond departments, to address common concerns that arise in each subject (e.g., students ENLS, Special Education students, lower 1/3, cusp students bordering 2-3, 1-2 on state exams Start August, 2018. Instructional Focus created by October, 2018. Ongoing through Principal, asst. principals, coach/lead teachers, lighthouse team, Students, Student Light House Team, Parents, Brooklyn North Service Staff 2018-19 SCEP-P 19  not completing assignments, attendance, social/home issues, and lack of Internet access in some homes to complete online work). During these meetings, plans can be put into place for the consistent utilization of pre-assessments across all content areas. A scheduled time for coaches and teachers to decide the best way to utilize the data for each class would benefit the grade as a whole. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Continuous communication to parents via multiple methods and languages, and through school wide cultural events. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. · Data collection, disaggregation, use of inquiry in Cabinet meetings further the instructional focus based on the needs of subg2018-19 SCEP-P 20  roups · Enlist consultant support in use of Datacation, Think Through Math, I-Ready, iLit, and Teq for all staff members ongoing throughout the year. · The lead teachers/coaches along with administr2018-19 SCEP-P 21  ation will work across content areas and grades to align classes in coherent instructional practices. The network will provide additional coaching, reviews, and reflective feedback. Administration will create a schedule of 2018-19 SCEP-P 22  meetings including start of the school year, midyear, and end of year conferencing around the expectations which are framed by the school instructional focus. The number of per session hours and teachers invol2018-19 SCEP-P 23  ved will be dependent upon budget after enrollment figures are solidified. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By March 2019, there will be a 70_% increase in students scoring at a level 2 or higher using components of the NYS common core writing rubric as measured by February benchmark assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. TTM, I-Ready, ST Math, I-Lit, Gates MacGinitiex Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Our strengths in this area are evidenced through many of the following programs or activities that help aid in the development of students’ academic, social and emotional health: • Opportunities for student voice and student choice through the Leader in Me • Transitional supports (middle to high school, discussions about college and career readiness through Leader in Me and weekend high school fair trip. Targeted early morning interventions for specialize high schools. Testing for aptitude. • In house Lutheran Medical Licensed clinical psychologist • Establishment of student personal and academic goals (September – June) • Monthly parental opportunities (Saturday ESL workshops) • Student recognition and events celebrations 2018-19 SCEP-P 25  • National Junior Honor Society, quarterly celebrations (December – June) • Student activities/community involvement/afterschool opportunities (September – June) • Student led conference • External Support: Center for family Life, Empire State Grant Champs, MSSL, Aperture • Leadership Day • Mid-Quarter progress reports · RTI team to meet on a regular / formal basis • Weekly updates for at risk students Anti-Bullying Week Based on elements from2016-2017’s Quality Review and connected to tenet 5 of the DTSDE, we noticed a need to communicate with and connect stakeholders to the academic, social, and emotional needs of all students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019 100 percent of staff members will have participated in the planning and tracking of individual students’ social and emotional goals as evidenced by student planners, meetings, tracking sheets and in leadership notebooks. And training for parents in The Leader In Me process will be a regular part of PTA and SLT meetings as well as during Saturday adult education courses. 2018-19 SCEP-P 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) · Continue training for the new staff members to sustain leadership principals by assigning a staff lead trainer/mentor All students, all staff September 2018 – June 2019 Principal, asst. principals, coach/lead teachers, lighthouse team, district and borough support staff, Student Light House team · Continue to monitor and track student progress, using the “Live Above the Line Paradigm”, and the 7habits in all lessons across the school. · Continue building out a strategy for sustainability after achieving Lighthouse status as a school. The Leader in Me Lighthouse School title is awarded by Franklin Covey to honor the attainment of a well-rounded leadership model. Lighthouse Schools serve as models of leadership and mentors to other schools. · Increase our parent education opportunities for adolescent development and human sexuality as well as local laws and customs.  Bridge-It (online program to address community conflict) training for all staff and students that helps support students in developing skills to reach positive expectations. Obtain an Ophthalmology or optometry clinic on site. Increased data analysis made available to staff will increase trust and communication between staff members and between staff and administration. Increase opportunities for professional growth and responsibility for staff increases level of trust as well Continue in 7th year of implementation of LIM process with maintaining Lighthouse status as the ultimate goal. The Leader in Me is a whole-school transformation model that improves the performance of all other programs. Based on The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People, The Leader in Me equips students with the self-confidence and skills they need to thrive in the 21st-century. Lighthouse recognition comes because of the results a school is achieving and the impact it is having on staff, students, parents, and the greater community. All students participate in the Leader In Me process. Language learning strategies will be utilized for ENLS, and IEP recommendations this will increase trust between students and between students and staff. All students September 2018 – June 2019 Principal, asst. principals, coach/ lead teachers, lighthouse team, district and borough support staff, PTA and parents, Student Light House Team 2018-19 SCEP-P 27  The school will host a variety of events to increase parental involvement and engagement through PTA meetings, CCLS workshop 30 min prior to each parent teacher conference, and student led conference. All families September 2018 – June 2019 Parent Coordinator Principal, asst. principals, coach/lead teachers The following celebrations and programs will build the capacity of trust for all stakeholders: Curriculum night, Honor Roll events, Newsletters, International night, Family Science night, Leadership Day and Parent Involvement Night and Art Gallery openings All families September 2018 – June 2019 Parent Coordinator Principal, asst. principals, coach/lead teachers Teachers and students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Continue to educate parents and guardians on the Leader In Me 7 habits. Parent Coordinator, Attendance Teacher, Guidance Counselors and staff. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. · Structured attendance team and meetings, daily monitoring, use of network attendance teacher for support with parent outreach, semester progress reports to parents, College and career readiness standards implemented in all classes, and RTI interventions. · Incentives: Student Lighthouse team, NJHR, leadership roles, trips, celebrations, and award certificates · Calendar of events for families, semester progress reports sent home, college and career readiness planning, and high school articulation breakfast sessions. Alignment of student and teacher programs to allow for leadership periods as well as leadership assemblies by grade Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Fall student led conference with parents. Ongoing conf. with leadership mentors to inventory progress toward academic goals and ensure that Leadership Notebooks are updated and ready for student led parent-teacher conferences in March. 2018-19 SCEP-P 28  Action Teams will report areas of success as well as next steps towards maintaining Lighthouse status to the staff. Development of a school wide goal tracking sheet Continuous walk through and observations Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS, Lighthouse Status Attendance and academic progress reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. x 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school engages in structured professional collaborations on teams using an inquiry approach that promotes leadership and focuses on improved student learning. Delivery of instruction is unified across grade levels as a result of frequent department meetings and collaboration amongst all grade level teachers. This allows students to have a greater degree of familiarity with academic expectations. · An improved system of IEP goal implementation through training on SESIS and through the distribution of IEPs-at-a-glance. Teachers have easy access to individual IEP’s. 100 percent of students will receive regular and data based feedback as evidenced by student work products resulting in improvements in their levels of achievement according to uniform rubrics across all subjects and grades al student goals, management needs, testing accommodations, and health concerns that they can and do utilize in their day-to-day classroom instruction. · All teachers have been trained in SIOP and goal-setting management. Some teachers have taken the Common Core workshops that have been offered outside the building. Due to this training, there is a common language among staff regarding student achievement. We modify the units of study, while still ensuring that the Common Core standards are met, so that all of our students have multiple points of entry · Leadership periods and advisory time have been largely successful in creating a safe space and providing access to learning and social opportunities. Students are encouraged to have a voice in their own educational experience while 2018-19 SCEP-P 30  they practice and strengthen their skills. In reflecting upon our work as a school in this regard last year, we determined that teachers were eager to have an opportunity to broaden the scope of students with whom they worked. This has been accomplished through push in and co-teaching changes. This has allowed for a larger sense of community amongst all students and staff. · Google classroom is a new strategy that seems to be working for the teachers who have embraced it. · Unified goal setting methods (big rocks, little rocks, W.I.G.S, Gantt charts) · As part of Leadership periods, teachers encourage students to revisit, discuss, and adjust their academic goals. Time is built into the week for grade level and/or departmental staff collaboration Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019, 100 percent of students will receive regular and data based feedback as evidenced by student work products resulting in improvements in their levels of achievement according to uniform rubrics across all subjects and grades 2018-19 SCEP-P 31  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Once a month set grade level meetings , beyond once a month departmental meetings, to address student work and common concerns that arise in each subject (e.g., students not completing assignments, attendance, social/home issues, and lack of internet access in some homes to complete online work). During these meetings, plans are put into place for the consistent utilization and sustainability of assessments across all grade/content areas. Distributed leadership structures are embedded so that there is effective teacher leadership and teachers play a role in key decisions that affect student learning across the school. Continue to develop students’ own abilities to ask analytical questions further building on culture of learning that communicates high expectations to the school community and supports students in developing academic and social emotional skills. Teacher teams establish a culture for learning that communicates a set of expectations for students and parents to provide clear feedback and advisory support to ensure that students are prepared for the next level. Individual goals are tracked and discussed at student led conferences Parent Involvement with regards to collaboration: Language Proficiency Team will reach out to 90% of our ENL parent population (increase of 10% from the 2017-2018 school year) beyond the mandated open school nights to address language acquisition, student progress, and strategies to use in the house to foster academic growth. Teachers will communicate with parents to clarify standards and benchmarks for student success using multiple forms of communication and parent outreach initiatives. Parents will be informed of important changes in the curriculum with regards to how their children are being assessed (both on statewide exams Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Principal, asst. principals, coach/lead teachers, lighthouse team, students, district and borough support staff Principal, asst. principals, coach/lead teachers, lighthouse team, students, parents, district and borough support staff Principal, asst. principals, coach/lead teachers, lighthouse team, students, and parents. All staff/students Start August, 2018. Instructional Focus created by October, 2018. Ongoing through June 2019 Start August, 2018. Instructional Focus created by October, 2018. Ongoing through June 2019 Start August, 2018. Instructional Focus created by October, 2018. Ongoing through June 2019 All students All students/parents 2018-19 SCEP-P 32  as well as formative and summative assessments in the classroom) via email, hard copy letter, and phone. This is our 7th year as a Leader in Me school and our 3rd year of student led conferences. Many students are able to speak about how to establish goals, track, meet, and reflect on their progress. Through this process, parents become academic accountability partners in the home. All students With the implementation of the Leader In Me process, setting norms that foster collaboration and a safe environment where all teachers are treated with dignity and respect and regarded as leaders for reform at the school, the necessary work of data analysis, creating a unified approach to summative and formative assessments to guide instruction as well as align curriculum to the instructional focus of the school continues. Given the level of increased trust in the building, teachers will collaborate to create common rubrics by department in order to provide quality feedback for students to employ as they grow and develop academically as well as reflect and assess their own progress. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Principal, asst. principals, coach/lead teachers, lighthouse team, students, district and borough support staff Start August, 2018. Instructional Focus created by October, 2018. Ongoing through June 2019 How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Continue to educate parents and communicate through multiple parent engagement activities, through the LIM process and through the Student Led Conferences. Year round. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Data collection, data breakdown and analysis, use of inquiry in Cabinet/departmental/grade level meetings to further the instructional focus based on the needs of subgroups · Peer Teacher Collaborators along with staff will work across content areas and grades to align classes in coherent instructional practices. The Brooklyn North Field Support Center provides additional coaching, reviews, and reflective feedback. · Administration will create a schedule of meetings including start of the school year, midyear, and end of year conferencing around the expectations which are framed by the school instructional focus  Student Led Conferences held twice a year with plus/delta (glow/grow) reflection and feedback for next steps. 2018-19 SCEP-P 33  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. October student led conference with parents. Ongoing conf. with leadership mentors to inventory progress toward academic goals and ensure that Leadership Notebooks are updated and ready for student led parent-teacher conferences in March. Action Teams will report areas of success as well as next steps towards Lighthouse status to the staff. Development of a school wide goal tracking sheet Continuous walk through and observations Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student Leadership Notebooks Documentation and tracking of LPT parents meetings Tracking and monitoring of departmental W.I.G.S through aligned assessment data and student work. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 34  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In June 2015, June 2016, and then again in June 2017 ( Also planned for August 2018), the administration cabinet and departments analyzed last year’s curricula and state exams with PCTs to come up with a needs assessment in three core areas for our community population. Then, as an administrative cabinet, departmental W.I.G.S (wildly important goals) cyclical goals which directly impact our progress emerged from the data. 1. Academic: increasing students that are emerging on the NYS math and ELA exams by 10% (tracked through core department W.I.G.S). We still need to continue to formally document language acquisition and fluency in all content areas for our school community in a unified in order to monitor and track student progress. 2. ELA/ENL 80% of student population will score an 2 or higher on the NYS ELA writing rubric 3. Sci 80% of the student population will score a 3 or higher on various areas of the NYS ELA writing rubric on lab reports. 4. SS 100% of the student population will make progress (2 or higher) on the NYS ELA writing rubric on unified DBQs. 2018-19 SCEP-P 35  5. Math 80% of the student population will make progress (2 of higher) based on departmental generated rubric on aligned performance tasks 2. Personal Leadership: maintain 95 % attendance throughout the year (tracked monthly), and increase the number of students living the 7 habits on a daily basis (keep the number at 95% tracked monthly). This is something that the school community does well. Further expand on personal leadership to incorporate a deeper connection to CCSS college and career readiness. We need to further implement rigorous curricula that meet the challenges of the CCSS and to continue to monitor systems to streamline the processes we currently have in place. The school leader uses proven models in the following ways: -SIOP model to address gaps in learning for ENLS. The protocol helps teachers plan and deliver lessons that allow English learners to acquire academic knowledge as they develop English language proficiency. -Standard operating procedures addressed in the staff handbook include required lesson plan elements bases on best practices on a school wide level: -Differentiation for students with disabilities providing different students with different avenues to learning (often in the same classroom) in terms of: acquiring content; processing, constructing, or making sense of ideas; and developing teaching materials and assessment measures so that all students within a classroom can learn effectively, regardless of differences in ability. -Summaries for lessons which can include but are not limited to discussions revolving around content and language objectives, surveys, exit slips or Q and A based on objectives. -Department are required to use protocols (such as the Tuning Protocol) when looking at student work to maximize efficacy of time allotted to work on the given task. The structured process allows for reflection and meaningful feedback on a project, assessment, a performance task, or any work in progress. The protocols afford teachers the opportunity to improve their work with the thoughtful and substantial feedback of colleagues. Attention is mostly given to best practices and improvement. -For our ENLs we analyze data from AMAO tool which includes intake info (NYSITELL, SIFE (Lens report), RLAT, RYOS, teacher assessment, etc. Data identifies areas of need). -Identification of quality instructional reading materials that are complex yet adaptable for ENLs. -Use of ELD framework for language acquisition development, CR154.2 regulations, with CCSS, and Expeditionary Learning modules for both identified ENLs, former ENLs, and students struggling with the content. -Cross curricula to support STEM science with math Department to identify areas of overlap in which we can support each other throughout the year. -Expeditionary Learning modules are MODIFIED and ADAPTED as determined by the needs of our students as determined by the results of assessments including MOSL, I-Ready, i-lit, formative and summative. -Engage and CMP3 units are modified as informed by TTM, item analysis, and baseline assessments upon reflection. -ELA/ESL common planning across grades to share best practices and create a PLC to address the specific needs of our school (academic conversation, vocabulary, writing structures, 21st century skills, project-based learning). 2018-19 SCEP-P 36  - Colleagues (Inter-visitations), Peer Collaborative Teachers, and administration observe classes (beyond the observation requirements) and gives feedback specific to the needs of particular students, especially ENLs and often students with IEPs. Continued cooperation with each other in developing a long range plan that has been implemented successfully over the past 9 years. The school has been able to restructure and re-staff in the following manner: Responsibilities have delegated to staff beyond the administration in a way that allows more teacher lead discussion and decision making. Structure provides support across all levels in a way that fosters professional learning while taking the focus away from the idea that observations are punitive. Organizational structure works in multiple directions to provide vertical and horizontal supports. Budget is maximized to allow for adequate staffing to start the year, provide programmatic support, acquisition and change when required. We have brought in systems to increase parent communication and participation. Budget is also planned as much as possible with medium to long range goals in mind allowing for fast response to changing needs and compliance issues. A mix of new, intermediate level (in terms of teaching experience) and experienced staff is encouraged to provide input, insight and support to each other and administration. Over time through attrition, encouragement and removal staff has gradually changed over 80% to a more highly qualified and motivated group of pedagogues. We have also established CBO partnerships that allow for extra academic support, arts and sports programming, and a medical, dental and mental health clinic on site. The school is organized by Principal, 2 APs, 2 academic Peer Collaborative Teachers (a 3rd peer collaborative teacher is on maternity leave), 1 IEP Special Ed compliance teacher, 1 RTI coordinator, 1 projects arts liaison, 1 Business Manager, and 2 dean / behavior intervention specialists Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, increase NYS exam results by 10% in both ELA and Math, along with the percent of Commanding ENLs on the NYSESLAT 2018-19 SCEP-P 37  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff)  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). As an administrative cabinet, we reviewed areas of weakness in our staff’s 2017-2018 MOTP as our focus lens for October to November. Our findings are based uponchanges to UFT contracted components subject to review. We have narrowed our focus lens to 3d (overall average from last year to be 3.0), 3b (overall rating to be 3.01), and 3c (overall rating to be 3.09). Therefore, our professional development and school wide W.I.G.S are around engagement, evaluating questioning and discussions (key terms justify, evaluate, evidence, along with Language objectives in all lessons), and DDI (focus on tuning protocols, Gantt charts, and unified departmental assessments to drive instruction.) By providing focused PD based upon need we will be increasing trust and communication between administration and staff. As the year progresses, the administrative cabinet (along with lead teachers and project arts liaison) will review the Advance Teacher Level MOTP Detail to track our findings each marking period (Sep-Nov, Dec-Feb, Mar-May, ending with June (to set summer PD and next steps)) to revise focus lens and tailor whole staff/individual professional development to improve on teacher practice and student progress. These cabinet meetings will fall after the monthly departmental W.I.G.s analysis and tracking meetings to see where we may need to adjust our process. Observation schedule and frequency is often adjusted to meet the needs of staff based upon what has been seen or analysis of results. Professional Learning provided based upon observable need or request. By including a diverse group of administrators and pedagogical staff in cabinet discussions and decision making we foster greater communication and trust across all staff levels while working towards improved student outcomes Continue to expand on training all teachers in how to effectively use student data to revise lessons and curricula to meet the needs of our subgroups All Teachers August 2018- June 2019 Administrative Cabinet and PCT''s All Teachers August 2018- June 2019 Administrative Cabinet and Lead PCT's 2018-19 SCEP-P 38  The practice of small group instruction and conferring with students will be purposeful, targeted, and lead to a clear next step. This time will yield deep levels of understanding of student need. Strengths and needs will then be consistently kept through conference notes in order to make the most of daily formative assessments. Student data will be consistently collected, analyzed, and organized in order to evaluate when students level and address these defined needs. Significant use of all adults in a classroom then is ensured. Continued workshops for parents, Leader in Me workshops around the practice of the 7 Habits in the home, STREAM events for all parents (Family Science Night, Curriculum Night, Nao Robot , etc.), Workshops for incoming 6th grade families, Honor events and Student of the Month, student created monthly newsletters This will increase communication and the effort to involve parents more directly in the students education. Continue to identify teaching practices that are deemed ineffective or developing and provide structured professional development to address these weaknesses in pedagogy including workshops, mentoring provided by colleagues and lead teachers as well as fostering a community of teachers that are reflective of their practice and make adjustments as needed for the success of students. Keeping to a consistent, agreed upon meeting time for all departments to reflect, review, and re-Gantt progress throughout the year beyond the scheduled common planning time. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All Teachers August Whole community 2018- June 2019 All Teachers August 2018- June 201 Administrative Cabinet and PCT's How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. PTA and SLT meetings. PTC 's in September and May. Messages, notices home Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Our goal is to maximize the instructional program by strategically aligning funds so that the unique needs of our school population are met. We coordinate our fiscal and human resources beginning with a full overview of allocated funds in collaboration with our Field Service Center budget manager and HR support person. Next we will allocate funds needed to cover classroom instruction and coaching and administrative staff based on programming needs using Tax Levy, Title 1 and Title III funds. Once all pedagogical staff is assigned, we will manage funds to cover rewards for improved behavior and funds to cover OTPS including: Teacher, and Para per session to support instruction and extra- curricular activities. Additionally we will utilize District Level support in the use of curriculum planning, programs and implementation of teacher team practices as well as: 2018-19 SCEP-P 39  - On-site feedback given regularly to school leaders (PPO and QR) -Support in identification of research-based instructional strategies and planning teacher Professional Learning -Support in data access and continual for on-site, job-embedded opportunities for school leaders and teachers. -Identification of parental resources Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Administrative observation of classroom instruction using Danielson: Midpoint benchmark: By March 1st 50% of staff will have been visited during classroom instruction by school leaders. 5. Units of study that exhibit Understanding by Design (UBD) precepts: midpoint benchmark: By February, 2019, the ELA/ESL PLC will review the data from the interim writing, RTI Tier I assessment to gauge student progress of our instructional focus. Departmental and teacher teams in each grade will assess and refine AIS subgroups, W.I.G.S, and scaffolding supports. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The Observation Cycle Inter-visitations WIG scoreboard Student Led conferences Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 40  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school has a wide range of parental involvement activities. We started the school year off with a large parent turn out for curriculum night with a focus on the Franklin Covey Leader in Me Program, CCSS, and Student Led Conferences. The common core guides and Leader in Me packets were handed out (which were grade and language specific) to provide materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their children’s academic achievement, such as literacy training, and using technology, as appropriate, to foster parental involvement by offering training session when appropriate for parents and providing and disseminating materials. To continue that momentum and cultural connections the school wide population was involved in an international night with PTA volunteers. We currently have over 50 PTA members in place that will hold meetings around the 7 Habits, CCSS, and school leadership meetings monthly to create sustainability. In October, we continued our Saturday morning parental programs that include parent workshops in technology (computer), art, math, Leader in Me parenting guide, and ESL. The ESL parent Saturday Program uses the Real Life English Grammar Series, Rosetta Stone, Smart board and laptops. This series takes into mind that the adult ESL learner is simultaneously leading the role of parent/family member. This program will help adult learners to develop reading fluency while inviting meaningful interaction related to everyday concerns parents have about school related topics. The Saturday Program now contains a leadership component aligned with the Leader in Me process used with the staff and student population. The school strives to educate its teachers, pupil services personnel, administration and other staff. The focus is on how to reach out to, communicate and work with parents as equal partners. We stress the value and utility of the contribution of parents, and how to implement and coordinate parent programs and build ties between parents and 2018-19 SCEP-P 41  schools. We accomplish this by providing professional learning opportunities on communicating with parents. We also analyze parental involvement, evaluations with school personnel and setting goals related to the feedback provided by the parents through the evaluation process. This includes an ongoing dialogue with the PTA committee and other pertinent personnel. The parent coordinator is actively involved in providing parents with parent advocacy in negotiating school related issues, bilingual guidance services and linkages with social services and community based organizations. Parents are encouraged to attend orientation sessions that address the plans and needs for our ENL population. In order to ensure effective involvement of parents and to support a partnership among the CBO (Center for Family Life), and SASF (sports and Arts Foundation) to educate the whole child, through the following activities specifically described below: -Parents are afforded the opportunity to meet with school officials and teachers at least four times a year, and every Tuesday afternoon (as per UFT contract), and at LPT meetings as evidence by a schedule, parent notices, attendance sheets, logs, agenda and interviews. -The school parent coordinator establishes a partnership in a positive and welcoming environment within the school to help parents support the instructional program and services. -The librarian is supporting native language resource materials by having them available in our school libraries to add to the Saturday Program. This program will increase literacy skills for LEP/ENLs and support immigrant parents with materials on how to acculturate to school environment and access social support services. - Tuesdays are an outreach day to contact and schedule for parent/teacher conferences to ensure lines of communication about their children academic achievement, their student leadership notebook, and their child’s W.I.G.S. - The school provides assistance to parents of children served by the school, as appropriate, in understanding topics such as the following. By undertaking and integrating the state’s academic content standards in conjunction with the state’s student academic achievement standards in a rigorous academic setting. -The school especially works with parents of newcomers to provide meaningful communication and involve parents in the American school system. -The school provides full opportunities for the participation of parents with limited English proficiency (LEP), parents with disabilities, and parents of migratory children. This includes providing information and school report required under section 111- state plans of the ESEA in an understandable and uniform format and, including alternative formats upon request and, to the extent practicable, in a language the parent understands to foster the school’s vision/mission. -The school provides an interpreter to provide information that needs to be communicated orally to parents. - The school assists with the login process for all students into Pupil Path (Skedula's parent and student access) to review grades, upcoming assignments, anecdotal and progress reports. - The school sends home quarterly progress reports which are also available via Pupil Path. -Administration and staff attended 6 middle school forums and fairs (Sep-Oct), in Cobble Hill, Kensington, Park Slope, Sunset Park, and Windsor Terrace to expand on our community outreach. -Brochures and letters are translated internally when necessary. -Parent meetings, training sessions on pupil path and computer and ESL programs are available. 2018-19 SCEP-P 42  -Parent counseling by staff and outside community agencies as well as financial and legal support are provided as needed through CBO’s School web-site and App. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019 parent attendance at parent and family events, programs will demonstrate an increase of 15% as evidenced by attendance logs. -2 in-house ARTS performances in December and June along with International Night and Family Science Night (Supports the whole child development-tracked using attendance from first curriculum night (Sep. 20th) as baseline, parent events throughout the year juxtaposed to the in-house performances-tracked monthly and documenting the amount of parent and student usage on Pupil Path.) 2018-19 SCEP-P 43  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). To enhance staff and student meetings and interactions with parents: LPT team continue to track ENLs progress using the AMAO tool continue to modify lessons for Leadership classes student ownership of leadership notebooks use of Pupil Path (Datacation) to track parent usage All students, SPEDS, ELLs, will participate in keeping a leadership notebook to track progress, have a period of leadership classes built into their schedule with two staff members. Language learning strategies will be utilized for ENLS, and the why behind SMART goals and progress will be understood for those individuals who have an IEP. Expansion of the number of programs, activities and procedures for the involvement of all parents (especially Title I eligible student) consistent with section 1118-parental involvement of the elementary and secondary education act (ESEA). The programs, activities and procedures are planned and operated in meaningful consultation with parents of participating children in the school based on last year’s attendance percentages Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Parents Students Staff August 2018- June 2019 Administrative Cabinet and PCT's Staff Students Whole school community August 2018- June 2019 Administrative Cabinet and PCT's All families August 2018- June 2019 Whole school community Extensive planning, training, and execution of student led conferences to promote dialogue between parents, students and school constituents centered on student learning and success. Whole school community August 2018- June 2019 Whole school community 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. NYU-Langone (formerly Lutheran) Medical Center, Center For Family Life, NYC Historical Society, Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 SCEP-P 44  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Continued local community support on getting greater year round support and involvement from a transient and undocumented parent population. Affording our parents access to Link NYC as many of our families have limited means of development on 21st century skills teaching methods and communication when their access to technology is limited or unreliable Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By June 2019, increase parent attendance at parent and family programs and participation by increments of 15% at each event. Increase parent response rate on environmental surveys -2 in-house ARTS performances in December and June. (Supports the whole child development-tracked using attendance from first curriculum night (Sep 15th) as baseline, parent events throughout the year juxtaposed to the in-house performances-tracked monthly and documenting the amount of parent and student usage on PupilPath.) -Mid-point, By February, 2019, evidence of improved parent involvement and communication will be evident through attendance tallied from Curriculum Night, International Night, 7 Habits parent training sessions, Parent Teacher Conferences, and the Parent Involvement Night. Further evidence will be student improvement in identified subgroups as evidenced by interim assessments and an increase in parents asking about grades, coming into the school for support, and thanking us for providing a supportive climate for the school wide community. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. LPT Meeting numbers Survey Response rates Attendance sheets for events Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 45  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, Math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June, 2019, all students who participate in the ELT program will demonstrate improvements in student work as evidenced by completion of CCLS task Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? X Voluntary Compulsory If the ELT program is voluntary, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. Parental outreach by school staff, including parent coordinator, administration and teachers. Encourage and reward students who participate through celebrations and other acceptable means. Part 3 – ELT Program Description The ELT program will be offered to all students eligible for Academic Intervention Services (AIS), with the goal of serving a minimum of fifty percent of AIS-eligible students. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program in a Priority School:  Integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging.  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduce risk for retention or drop out, and increase the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  Engage in outreach activities made to families. Target all students who are not at proficiency level in the NYS ELA and Math assessment. Additionally, target any student who is identified and recommended by a teacher as struggling in a core content area. The proposed ELT program will increase the amount of quality of learning time, through before and after-school and summer programs and opportunities and through use of on-site CBO’s trained in our various on-line programs and supported by school staff and PD. Additional instructional time will be available to students through various on-line programs provided to students by the school (TTM,) accessible during off school hours including but not limited to 2018-19 SCEP-P 46  evenings and weekends. These systems can be monitored and analyzed by teachers and administrative staff to evaluate student usage and academic growth. The ELT program will focus on increasing student academic achievement through enrichment   The ELT program ’ s academic content aligns with CCLS and the Chancellor ’ s city-wide expectations.   The ELT program will be delivered by staff who have the capacity to deliver high-quality academic content. The ELT program will have a guidance component to address social/emotional needs of the students using the PBIS research-based model. All instruction will be provided by a NYS certified teacher in that particular content area and this will be ensured by through the supervision of the Principal and the Asst. Principal as the budget permits. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. 2. 3. Explain how you will evaluate the program to assess impact on student achievement. School Principal, Assistant Principals, PCT's, SLT, School Lighthouse team, CBO supervisory staff Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. August – September2018– Analyze data and identify target population September – October parental outreach September 2018- August 2019 program ongoing (dependent upon funding sources) Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. Staff available before and after school Lunch time availability Per-Session availability CBO's Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. 21st Century Title I 1003(a) X X Tax Levy X Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA SIG Grant P/F Set-aside School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring 2018-19 SCEP-P 47  Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. February, 2019, Midyear assessment of student progress based on the Review of student work portfolios by school administrators and program teachers. Part 6b. Indicate the instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student progress reports and report cards. In class assessments. Progress, proficiency, growth on periodic or state assessments. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 48  Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Tier One / Two) small group 10:1 Tailored program for individual students (1:1, with tchr support) Individual and Small group (max. 5:1) 1:1 or small group (repeat model in each of 4 major subjects) Small group (5:1) Before and after school During school day teachers offer students appointments, 7:30am-2:30pm, M-F, min. 1/wk Before and during school Quarterly meeting and discussion during school hours Medium to large groups (max 20:1 Mornings with ESL teacher (5/wk) 7 students confer with 3 teachers Saturday (3 hrs) – over 8 months (repeat model in each of 4 major subjects) Quarterly (4/yr) meetings and discussions during school hours Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students at Level 1 or 2 as per the 2018 NYS ELA exam Level 1 or 2 Students who also are those scoring in lowest 20% of I Ready data – as needed, all (ESL & ELA) students are offered 1:1 academic assistance Teacher referral for 1:1 language/ELA support based on observable low performance in class Support for First year gen ed setting- former ELLs (tested out) conference with teachers/ guided instruction & review (Tier One-Two) teacher refinement of I-Ready program content to meet skill needs of student Teacher-led strategy or content instruction, specific to student needs reading skills development using a variety of strategies (e.g., Wilson, Great Leaps, Words My Way) ESL ‘newcomer’ ENLs, grade 7 Co-gen. Strategy (discussions, reflections, solutions, actions) ENLs -offered to all ability levels tutoring Support for former ENLs in first year gen. ed. settings (NYSESLAT score=commanding Saturday program with ability-leveled groups. Smaller Classroom groupings for beginner ENL’s 2018-19 SCEP-P 49  Mathematics Science Social Studies or 3 or higher on NYS ELA exam) Co-gen. Strategy (discussions, reflections, solutions, action plans) Students at Level 1 or 2 as per the 2018 NYS MATH exam Level 1 or 2 Students who also are those scoring in lowest 20% of TTM data – Students at-risk, by parent request or tchr rec Teacher referral for 1:1 MATH support based on observable low performance in class Students who scored Level 1 or 2 on grade 8 NYS Science and those who also perform in lowest 20% of class Teacher referral for Literacy or math issues Tchr tutoring appts Teacher referral for Literacy or math issues Think Through Math, ST Math On-line program, self- leveled Think Through Math Small group 10:1 Small group or individual Small group or individual (see above) - small group 1:10 Before and after school Before, during and after school Before, during and after school Teacher-led direct instruction targeting skill deficiencies -math skill development using a variety of strategies and opportunities for practice ( great leaps, NYS Math Coach student texts) See ELA, Math above -1:1 or small group -Before or during the school day (max 1:3) -Before the school day (morning program Medium-sized groups (max. 1:15) Mornings and afternoons As above (M-F) Small group or individual tutoring or teacher initiated program Before, during and after school Minimum 1/weekly See ELA, Math above As above Before, during and after school Small group or individual tutoring as part ofinitiated program 2018-19 SCEP-P 50 At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) home contacts & dialogue as needed -Mentor groups check-in daily determined to be fit for each student; during the school day Once or twice weekly as determined to be fit for each student; during the school day Daily, after school ATTENDANCE home contacts -1:1 (contacts) -1:1 or 1:2 -4 students per 1 teacher select small group counseling Largely 1:1, some select small group counseling Small Group Students whose pattern of absence is 8-10% (on-going Students displaying poor adaptive skills and/or negative social-emo behaviors (referrals or parent request) LMC/msw Students displaying poor adaptive skills and/or negative social-emo behaviors (referrals or parent request) CFL/SASF -dialogue with student & att. Team members –Success Mentors: paired with an adult for ‘check in’ counseling with therapy action plans for indiv. students – also may include a family therapy plan as determined to be fit counseling with therapy action plans for individual students – also may include a family therapy plan as determined to be fit (Tier One /Two) intervention – open to all, some attend by recommendation Homework assistance and tutoring provided 2018-19 SCEP-P 51  Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 26 - 2017-2018 Counseling Budgetary Support Uniforms School Supplies Referral Services Medical and Dental Mental Health Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-P 52  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 SCEP-P 53  Section 9: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Our professional learning plan is guided by the NYC Chancellor’s Handbook for Professional Learning and provides for whole school and individual teacher support (August through June, ongoing). Although much of the training will be differentiated with to meet the specific needs of individual teachers as well as subjects, all staff members will receive training and support in the use of data to inform instruction and understand the progress of all learners/subgroups • September roll out of systematic analysis of data collection, monitoring and teacher conferencing, January check in for progress evaluation, June assessment, reflection and next steps. October through June, on- going – teacher feedback sessions, October through June ongoing Looking at Student Work protocol implementation • Opportunities for differentiated professional development for staff members using the weekly allocated time as well as structured periods and events. • Prepare teaching staff in NYC, CCLS and Instructional Expectations (on-going). • Formal and informal cycles of observations will be conducted by school leaders using feedback and tracking progress September through June. • Identification of point personnel, lead teachers, to support colleagues • Principal and Assistant Principals provide workshops and teacher conferencing. Key personnel and other resources will include leadership, network support instructional leads and external consultants. • Targets to evaluate our progress, effectiveness and impact will include: By November 2018 school leaders will complete a full day instructional walk with school teacher leaders and coaches. Report will be generated and shared 2018-19 SCEP-P 54  with teachers. Professional development will be designed based on needs assessment from the instructional walk-through. • Visits from our field support group conducted as follow up in order to document progress. • Frequent cycles of informal and formal observation • Teacher mid-year, end-year evaluations and self-evaluation Paraprofessionals are offered Professional development opportunities through the school and through the Brooklyn support center. Administrators are offered Professional Development opportunities through the district office, the Brooklyn Field Service Support Center and conferences when available. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Staff members on the Schools Light house team Staff members on the administrative cabinet During grade and departmental meetings Lead teachers, coaches and administrators look at the data analysis with their staff to discuss and decide on the best forms of ongoing assessment and baseline assessments for measuring 2018-19 SCEP-P 55  student growth. Staff along with mentors administrators and coaches come up with desired PD's or areas of need (and staff desire) to determine or PD plan well in advance. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Federal Federal Federal Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 421,718 x transferred to ms821 x 0 0 24,142 TBD 4,231,988 n/a n/a x n/a x Column B Section Reference(s) Parent Involvement, Curriculum & Staff Development Contracts, PD, Education Consultants, Software Summer School n/a n/a Saturday Program (Per-session, Enrichment for ELL's) Summer Enrichment Staffing (tax Levy) 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, 2018-19 SCEP-P 56  State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities 2018-19 SCEP-P 57  funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-P 58  Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school.Charles Dewey, MS 136, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Charles Dewey, MS 136 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 SCEP-P 59  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; 2018-19 SCEP-P 60  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand School-Parent Compact (SPC) Charles O. Dewey, MS 136 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: 2018-19 SCEP-P 61  ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; 2018-19 SCEP-P 62  ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; 2018-19 SCEP-P 63  ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-P 64 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 3 9 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-P 65  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Schedule: Saturday Mornings 9am to 12pm Each class will be composed of 15 students in a rotating model (based on 15:1 ratio (student to teacher) Students&nbsp;are grouped in conversational pairs and are joined back for whole group Begin description here: A bilingual licensed teacher and an ENL teacher skilled in enhanced instruction in core academic areas of study will be leading instruction of the Saturday Academy. They will provide supplemental support in NLA/English for grade 6-8 newcomers, students who scored as entering on NYSESLAT as well as SIFE students. Title III funding is used to provide academic activities that promote conceptual and linguistic support for our newcomers and long term ELLs. We are increasing language acquisition for our newcomers to improve academic achievement preventing them from becoming LTEs. Purpose: To build English Language Proficiency and create meaning about content in math and social studies. Utilization of ENL learning and performance indicators, Framework for ELPD corresponding to Common Core State Standards. · · English&nbsp;language proficiency ability as assessed).Groups formed on basis of proficiency, but are&nbsp;heterogeneous&nbsp;in regards to grade (grades 6-8 are placed by ability). · · instruction · total of 49 sessions · including attendance, meals served, as well as baseline, interim and final assessment data. · Notifications&nbsp;to parents are sent out in through various forms of communication (letters translated&nbsp;into primary languages of Spanish, Chinese or Arabic, emails through Skedula/Pupil Path, automated phone calls sent out by the parent coordinator in order to keep parents informed and up to date, as well as phone calls&nbsp; by site administrator to ensure consistent attendance throughout the program).&nbsp; · students' primary language of Spanish as needed to support learning.&nbsp; Teachers use Google translations as needed in Chinese and Arabic as well. Our plan is based on identified specific areas of academic need, setting challenging goals for learners, use of data driven decision making and strong understanding of instructional approaches. Identified areas of student strengths and weaknesses are based on NYSED item analysis tool, data analysis from the intake process along with NYSITELL, MLS report for SIFE, findings from the ELLs PLC inquiry group, RLAT, teacher assessment, AMAO analysis for ELLs ,Expeditionary Learning Modules, formative assessments including oral language proficiency, oral reading fluency and IReady. ENL students were identified who have difficulty mastering a proficient level of academic achievement on the CCSS for ELA/Math and NYSESLAT. Ongoing formative assessments in ELP and reading will drive instructional practices based on student needs. The goal is to maintain increased speaking and compliance in English. Teacher responsibilities will include: Knowledge of CCSS Standards, Bilingual framework/Engage NY, The session will begin on / October 20th 2018 and end on May 18th, &nbsp;2019 with a Records&nbsp;are compiled and aggregated&nbsp;by administrative&nbsp;staff on site Primary&nbsp;language of instruction for the program is English with&nbsp;supports in 2018-19 SCEP-P 66  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information ENL Instructional Strategies including SIOP. In disseminating the NYSESLAT modalities we've noticed in the listening feature that our newcomers' conversational discourse and response to task based questions was deficient and therefore we will build on these identified deficiencies. Targeted academic language will be reinforced in the Saturday program and we will provide ongoing feedback to classroom teachers. Rooms have program libraries rich in informational texts that according to CCSS serve as a platform for anchoring instruction about words and structured conversations. These libraries include Oxford dictionaries in Chinese, Arabic and Spanish. Students are initially identified and grouped according to NYSESLAT levels. Within in classes, students can be placed homogeneously or heterogeneously depending on the activity. Supplemental materials are distinct from those used in daily instruction (research based ESL programs such as Steck Vaughn (Grammar), English is Fun, Vocabulary Connections, supplemental vocabulary and grammar sheets from various ENL websites, along with authentic teacher created materials). rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: Pd activities include how to articulate specific language and content objectives, use of short videos, visuals and graphics, integration of academic vocabulary instruction, writing to extend content understandings, verbal interaction with sentence starters and turn and talk, think pair share activities. PD on how to increase language opportunities, conversations that analyze ideas, content specific reading and listening with a variety of goals and purposes, code-based skills, meaning-based competencies, understanding language meaning, ideas, academic language and vocabulary. Tracking through CCSS standards. The ELA/ENL Coordinator, Harriet Hoffman will meet with the ENL teachers to conduct professional development one time per week from 2:20 pm-3:00 pm. Agendas and attendance sheets are maintained to record pd sessions by administration. The goal of professional development is to give teachers the necessary tools to differentiate for ENLs in order to give all students full access to a rigorous curriculum in a general education setting. This pd is provided at no cost to the program as it is provided by on site staff. Administration and staff hold an orientation for parents and incoming 6th grade students during the summer months prior to the school year. We then try to match up incoming students with 7th and 8th graders or teacher mentors to alleviate the transition in middle school. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered 2018-19 SCEP-P 67  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities · · name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Begin description here: For the sole purpose of informing parents as to the success of intervention, teachers will contact parents/guardians one time per week via phone and or on-site conversation. ENL Coordinator conducts meetings with parents to discuss overview of the additional support for their children, as this is not part of the school's core program. Explanation of vocabulary and language acquisition strategies as well as the technical programs utilized are also provided. Parent Coordinator, Damaris Garcia will also reach out to parents by making phone calls, sending letters and inviting parents to attend the Language Proficiency Team meetings so parents are aware of the types of strategies incorporated in the classrooms, ie: SIOP, CLOSE Reading Protocols, etc. She reaches out to parents via mass telephone calls (school messenger) as well as individual calls, backpacking information with students, Pupil Path e-mail, and PTA. Parent activities can range from workshops, PTA meetings to special events. Schedules: Monthly PTA meetings - 1 hour Monthly/Bi monthly Workshops - 1 hour to 1 hour and a half Two to Three times a year Special Events - 2 hours to 2 hours and a half . Our rationale for parent activities is: • PTA meetings - to continually inform and offer parents opportunities to express their concerns • Workshops – Parent education, life skills • Special events – Celebrations to bring our school community together • The school will involve the parents of children served in Title I, Part A program(s) in decisions about how the Title I, Part A, 1% set aside funds, are reserved for parental involvement . All records of attendance will be maintained in accordance with DOE rules and regulations and SOP. Letters are backpacked home to all parents in the home language as indicated on the HILs. The parent component of our Saturday program uses the English Is Fun program, Rosetta Stone, Smart Boards and laptops. The series takes into mind that the adult ENL learner is simultaneously leading the role of parent/family member. This program help adult learners to develop reading fluency while inviting meaningful interaction related to every day concerns parents have. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. Per session conceptually consolidated Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. conceptually consolidated 2018-19 SCEP-P 68  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. conceptually consolidated conceptually consolidated conceptually consolidated conceptually consolidated Per diem 2. Purchased services 1. High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL conceptually consolidated conceptually consolidated conceptually consolidated conceptually consolidated conceptually consolidated conceptually consolidated conceptually consolidated conceptually consolidated 2018-19 SCEP-P 69  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 15 School Name Charles O. Dewey Borough Brooklyn School Number 136 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Eric Sackler Coach Harriet Hoffman/ENL PCT ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ana Aguirre/SP DUAL SCI Teacher/Subject Area Nancy Landau/Sci PCT Teacher/Subject Area Mikaela Henry/SP Dual SS Related-Service Provider Jessica Kivelevitz/Speech Superintendent Anita Skop Assistant Principal Sarah Monteleone/ENL/ELA Coach Danielle Siegel/ENL model TCH School Counselor Alex Rankin/SPMalekah Altaheri Parent Mr. Ramirez Parent Coordinator Damaris Garcia Field Support Center Staff Member Tatyana Ulubabova Other (Name and Title) Xin Rong/ENL C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 5 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 3 2 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-P 70  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 483 Total number of ELLs 191 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 39.54% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL Lang. School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2016-17 K 1 2 3 4 5 2017-18 2018-2019 6 11 25 27 63 7 0 0 25 25 8 0 0 0 0 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 Tot # 11 0 0 25 52 0 88 0 0 0 DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Capacity Framework Element 1 – Rigorous Instruction At the beginning of each school year we review the current NYSESLAT scores and found that students who consistently show low performance in the writing modality now show growth because of the focus lens on questioning techniques, common use of the NYS 6-8 writing rubric, aligned prompts, and formative extended response writing samples in all content areas. The schoolwide focus for 2017 is to continue to drive writing and vocabulary across all content areas with a unified focus on critical thinking and writing prompts to engage students in further analysis of evidence and justification in reasoning in all content area classes. 2018-19 SCEP-P 71  Every student is assessed using a research based online program i-Ready ,which uses Fountas and Pinnell, along with a baseline from NYSESLAT, MOSL reading/writing, new NYSITELL, AMAO grouping, and Spanish LAB. The data shows that many of our ENL students (despite their levels on the NYSESLAT-if applicable) on average are reading 3 to 4 grade levels below. This data is expected for our newcomer and SIFE population but not our Expanding/Transitioning/Commanding, LTE students that come from an elementary dual or TBE setting. We are using EDAT data, along with SIOP lesson plans, and language acquisition in all content areas to support language development. Students are self assessing their progress along the WIDA checklist/new language progressions/NYS CCSS 6-8 Speaking Standards which is aligned with CCLS and ESL methodologies to scaffold and reflect on their baseline skills in literacy. Therefore, further supporting the students with tools to help them in navigating higher levels of text and critical thinking skills. However, for the Transitioning/Commanding ( and recently proficient) students we have an ENL/ELA integrated instructional model using Expeditionary Learning CCLS modules along with higher order texts to engage all level learners.The Language Acquisition Team evaluates the success of our programs for the ELLs by reviewing the data gathered from statewide testing. This data is reviewed throughout the school year (usually starting in August when NYSESLAT Data is available and in July when ELA-Reading data is available). We are constantly monitoring our data to look for patterns and performance as to avoid misinterpreting language acquisition as a learning/ language disability. Base upon our inquiry review cycles, we adapt instruction based on formative assessments and student learning. After careful review of various school accountability reports including the most recent quality review, school-wide assessment data for the 2017-2018, and the learning environment survey, we developed the following CEP goals around ENL instruction. By June 2019, students who are continuously enrolled from September through June will demonstrate growth on the ELA (in-house administrated MOSL using the CC NYS ELA writing rubric) benchmark/initial from Fall 2018 to Spring 2019 as measured by ELA (in-house administrated MOSL using the CC NYS ELA writing rubric). ELA Data Analysis against 2016 & 2017 & 2018 NYS CCSS exams ( for all students) ELA Data Analysis of our Spring 2019. By June 2019, 80% of the student population will score proficient on an authentic math MOSL that is administered three times a year to evaluate grade appropriate skills and word problems. The department observes perseverance in how a student navigates through complicate word problems. Analysis: Based on our 2016-2017 data: 21 ENL students scored commanding on the NYSESLAT which was a 7% increase from 2015-2016, where 18 students scored commanding. This year we took a deep dive into our student data focusing on results of those that took the NYSESLAT and had two consecutive years of ENL instruction in our school. The student growth in these subgroups was astonishing. Students that were with us for 6th-8th grade, 39/46=85% of this subgroup continued to show growth and 7th-9th (promoted last year) 37/41=90% of this subgroup continued to show growth in all four modalities. Still awaiting 2017-2018 data We have found that by using the AMAO tool based on current student enrollment, NYS ELA, and NYSESLAT data will be inconsistent from one year to the next due to the change of the NYSESLAT. The NYSESLAT is more aligned to the NYS 6-8 writing rubric with the targets of measurement and the performance level descriptors, which the inquiry team hopes will give us a clearer picture of progress compared to that of the NYS ELA item analysis. For this year, the Language Acquisition Team has decided to include the Academic Intervention Specialist, the Reading Coach, the Science Coach, the Math Coach, the ENL coordinator, the Parent Coordinator, the assistant principal supervising literacy/ESL, an ENL teacher, a Special Education Teacher, a Speech teacher, and a literacy teacher to evaluate the current baseline assessments that we administered and review of student work as a team. Through our data findings so far, administration has created two separate professional learning communities to focus on specific data relevant to different ENL subgroups. We currently have one inquiry professional learning community focused on SWD ENL learners. This group is comprised of an administrator, math teacher, ENL Coordinator, 2 ENL teachers, and an AIS coordinator . The focus lens from 2017-2018 school year is on navigating higher order texts, critical thinking, providing RTI based on formative assessments, Pearson's ilit online reading monitoring program, and review of student progress in all content areas. Discussions around the similarities in characteristics between language and learning disabilities according to the common misconceptions about ELLs and the Second Language Acquisition Process realities handout . For true data research, the groups findings are null/void until there are two years of consistency on NYS ELA/math/NYSESLAT exams. However, as stated before, until this happens, the team has decided that the target population will be tracked based on students reading on grade level (Fountas and Pinnell levels) based on their progress 2018-19 SCEP-P 72  on Curriculum Associate's i-Ready, the MOSL, and NYS ELA item analysis. The other inquiry team is looking at our target LTE subgroup that receives EngageNY Expeditionary Learning CCLS modules, their progress, involvement in school activities which further develops the whole child and their language progression . Each PLC turn-keys their findings with each other, administration and the staff to further drive academic achievement for our ELLs. From 2016-2017 data, on the RLAT in ATS and the AMAO, we have found that our incoming LTE sixth graders had a significant drop in critical thinking skills and analysis of evidence (between grades 2-5). We have also found that our newcomers who score proficient in the Spanish Lab and test Beginner on the English Lab usually progress at a higher rate than those who are not proficient in their native language. The advanced ELLs who were approaching the LTE level, reached a plateau on the NYSESLAT, which becomes our potential SIFE or RTI groups. All ELLs consistently perform on a low level on the writing portion. Since students score lower on the reading and writing portion of the NYSESLAT, it is determined that more instructional focus and rigor on reading and writing modalities must be provided in the classroom. Still waiting for 2017-2018 data inorder to note patterns and trends. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? In the 2016-2017 school year, a small TBE class was created on the 6th grade to further develop native language skills and academic vocabulary in content areas across the grade to support language acquisition. waiting for the ELE results to review and revisit our program. In 2017-2018 school year, we created a dual language class on the 6th grade, along with integrated ENL for the transitioning/expanding/commanding students. For our newcomers (entering/emerging) they are programmed for 360 minutes of stand alone ENL services along with push-in ELA and 360 minutes of integrated science . In 2018-2019 school year, there will be a continuation of the dual language program for the 6th to 7th grade and the incoming 6th graders. This years focus will be in science and social studies classes content in a combination class of varied levels of students in order to push rigor. For our newcomers (entering/emerging) they are programmed for 360 minutes of stand alone ENL services along with push-in ELA and 360 in other content area classes. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The Team monitors systems and structures within our ENL program by:1. Teachers create learning targets and aligned assessments based on EDAT analysis which includes the NYSESLAT modalities and the Item Analysis data from all state exams. Then that information is aligned to common core standards and the learning targets to guide selection and analysis.2. Teachers establish a culture of looking at data to further develop student's literacy.3. Establish class norms, ensuring that student voice and choice is heard, and that everybody meets their goal. 4. Monitor curriculum maps, units, lessons plans and assessments for evidence of instructional focus during supervisory instructional rounds and provide feedback to school community and teacher teams.5. Monitor teacher effectiveness implementation for evidence of instructional focus during supervisory instructional rounds focused on examining low inference notes, alignment of evidence to rubric, quality of feedback, support provided and it’s impact on future practice with emphasis on power competencies (1e, 1f, 3b, 3c and 3d). 6. Design lessons that incorporate metacognition skills and a demonstration on how student's self reflect on work, e.g. correction procedures and post assessment reflections.6. Re evaluate and adjust the instructional plan during each unit module beyond the mid-year school wide goal progress check-in to ensure that all students are successful based on the data examined. Impact to Date: All content area teachers across the grades are adapting and utilizing unit assessments to develop flexible groups. Therefore, more students are passing core subjects, have aligned departmental formative assessments, and students are reflecting on their conferencing notes with teachers in order to show metacognition. The results are that all students are setting goals and reflecting on their learning process. 2018-19 SCEP-P 73  4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Interventions and RTI groupings will be created in September 2018 based on ELA/NYSESLAT/ELE data and SIFE numbers. We further adapted our SIFE plan to meet the needs of our current ENL population for the 2018-2019 school year. It is as follows: A student that has 2 yrs less schooling than peers Functions at least 2yrs below expected grade level in reading and math May be preliterate in native language We determine: -age upon arrival and years of schooling -analyze answers to SIFE questionnaire -and address social, emotional, and cultural needs -nature and extent of prior knowledge and educational experiences - the types of differentiated practices and supplementary academic intervention practices to implement We utilize NL as a means to -access prior knowledge -provide instruction in the content area -validate student’s L1 and culture -transfer skills to English -further development academic speaking Instructional Methodologies Building Background Knowledge- target of instruction is focused and content specific. As per Marzano, background knowledge is stored in memory as “I” events.( student is directly involved) what I did, how I felt, etc. Explicit Instruction with a focus on themes. Breaking content into small segments with modeling, scaffolding and feedback Scaffolding, but the nature, duration and intensity are modified as language proficiency increases ( table of scaffolded strategies included) Total Physical Response- the synchronization of language and body movements through action responses and direct commands Language Experience Approach- responding to and recording an experience SIOP iReady MyOn Tiered Vocabulary- explaining, demonstrating, drawing Balanced literacy- alphabet knowledge and phonemic/ phonological awareness, comprehension strategies. Cognates in NL in all content classrooms Growth Mindset along with Angela Duckworth's Grit survey 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The EDTA tool allows us to review the full scope and sequence of our interventions and whether we were successful or not with our current student. However, we lose the snapshot of the ones that were recently promoted as that data in ATS is transferred to the new school. This information then off sets our data and is not a true reflection of progress. This was why the team choose to create a subgroup when analyzing the data around those that had direct instruction in our school for two consecutive years. The team does look closely at the flagged information regarding tiers of suggested intervention and align them to the curricula and current supports in place. The team also recognizes that the students at risk (as per the AMAO requirements) do not match to school's findings on those that are at risk. The impact of this work over the past few years with this inquiry process has been the following: • Students have Leadership Notebooks where they hold Student Led Conferences, write and reflect on teacher comments and feedback to improve skills using reflective feedback forms evaluating their process, revealing “glows and grows” off of the WIDA charts.• AMAO data for 2017-2018 starts our year off with 85 2018-19 SCEP-P 74  students incoming 6th graders who did not achieve proficiency on the NYSESLAT. This amount has increased since the previous year where we had 82 incoming 6th graders for the 2016-2017 school year. We currently have 80 newcomers, 75 developing, and 41 Long Term ELLs. The results of the NYSESLAT being more aligned to the NYS 6-8 writing rubric with the targets of measurement and the performance level descriptors is providing the inquiry team with a clearer picture of progress and growth. • Based on growth scores on NYS exams, the school went from ‘In Need of Improvement’ to ‘Good Standing’. The school community is looking to further this progress through student initiate on academic growth, process, and tracking of progress in different learning modalities.• The School Quality Snapshot indicates the school is closing the achievement gap. ENLs are making good improvement in ELA, and improvement in math, special needs students are making improvement in ELA and good improvement in Math, low performing students are making good improvement in ELA and Math• Targeted instruction based on formative feedback. • Targeted skill focused grouping. • Targeted action planning/goal setting.• Revision and reflective planning.• Progress monitoring evidence of student improvement.• Student progress and tracking.• Increased teacher collaboration.• Increased knowledge of how students learn best. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. After reviewing the current 2017-2018 NYSESLAT scores, we have found that students who normally perform low in writing showed growth because of the focus lens on questioning techniques, common use of the NYS 6-8 writing rubric, prompts were aligned, formative extended response writing samples in all content areas and overall consistency of delivery of instruction. The schoolwide focus for 2017-2018 was and will continue to drive writing and vocabulary across all content areas with a unified focus on critical thinking questions and writing prompts to engage students in further analysis of evidence and justification in reasoning in all content area classes. However, the change in the NYSITELL, February 1st, 2018, is now aligned to that of the NYSESLAT and we anticipate newcomers/beginners will not perform as well in previous years based on their level of language acquisition. Like that in the past, students that performed proficient on the NYSITELL were able to progress more rapidly than those that scored on a beginner level. Any student that scored advance on the NYSITELL scored on a higher level on the NYSESLAT writing than that of a beginner on the NYSITELL. In some cases, if a child scored transitioning on the NYSITELL, the team decided to push the child and place them in an advanced, integrated ENL class, where often the child exceeds the team's expectations in this placement. Based on our predictions with the new NYSITELL, we have found that those that are new to the system score entering as projected. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Staff meetings, Departmental,Meetings, Cabinet Meetings, Grade Level meetings, Student-Teacher Meetings/conferences Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. We have changed our 2018-2019 programming model for ENL students from a 9 standalone ENL classes across three grades to an integrated model across the school. The basis of this change is to allow for more ENL students to have rigorous instruction across the grades so that they have the opportunity to take the 8th grade regents Algebra and Living Environment exam. Programming is as per the CRPart154.2 mandates for ENL learners. ENL students are taught in English using the ELA CCLS modules and ENL progressions from engageny.org. All teachers providing ENL services 2018-19 SCEP-P 75  are city and state certified and all content area teachers are trained to use the SIOP model and WIDA. The teachers providing ENL services for our SIFE students are trained in second language acquisition theory, ENL and sheltered methods, based on need, some self-contained classes have a bilingual para during instruction in reading and writing and content domains, as well as, cross-cultural communication. Teachers continue to monitor ENL student progress (e.g., student work, formal and informal assessments, test results, journals, Leadership Notebooks, WIDA checklist, CAT, unified rubrics, etc.), and systematically adjusts instructional planning based on a wide of the evidence and data gathered. Content Area Teams use the Tuning and ATLAS protocol when evaluating student work. Several content core teachers hold a QTEL, bilingual, and TESOL certificate as well. Students are in a co-teaching environment for English instruction with one certified ENL teachers and one content area teacher. All ICT classes have a SPED and content area, along with an ENL certified teachers for English instruction push-in for mandates units. The ENL teachers will travel to various ENL content area classes to service expanding/transitional students with 90 minutes in their core content area classes of ESL instruction. The emerging/entering/low transitioning are homogeneously grouped where they receive 4 units of ESL instruction with teacher monitoring and assessments in English with supports in their native language. All commanding students are receiving 90 minutes of ENL instruction within core content area classes. Content/ENL Teams meet weekly, during school hours, to discuss formal and informal assessments, findings, and evaluate student work. They also meet weekly, during extended time, to then plan, add, or edit their lessons based on their findings. This also pertains to modifying the CCLS modules to meet the student's individual needs. b. TBE program. If applicable. n/a c. DL program. If applicable. in 2018-2019 school year, we have created a second dual language class on the incoming 6th grade along with the 7th grade group that rolled up from the 2017-2018 school year. However, the newly selected students in this program are a combination of those that were enrolled from kindergarten, students that have a home language of Spanish, and that their first language is English but they speak Spanish at home. In 2017-2018 school year, we created a dual language class on the 6th grade, along with integrated ENL for the transitioning/expanding/commanding students. For our newcomers (entering/emerging) they are programmed for 360 minutes of stand alone ENL services along with push-in ELA and 360 minutes of integrated science . 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Beyond the units of ENL and ELA instruction delivered each week by a highly qualified teacher, those students that are recently proficient 2016-2017, receive units of instruction in core content areas through integrated instruction by an ENL teacher. Students in this category receive .5 units of ENL instruction to further language development. There are 13 integrated ENL classes across three grades. Our Integrated ENL classes are taught in English using the CCLS modules from engageny.org. All teachers providing ENL services are city and state certified and all content area teachers are trainned to use the SIOP model. The teachers providing ENL services for our SIFE students are trained in second language acquisition theory, ENL and sheltered methods, based on need, some classes have a bilingual para during instruction in reading and writing and content domains, as well as, cross-cultural communication. Teachers continue to monitor ELL student progress (e.g., student work, formal and informal assessments, test results, journals, Leadership Notebooks, WIDA checklist, CAT, unified rubrics, etc.), and systematically adjusts instructional planning based on a wide of the evidence and data gathered. Content Area Teams use the Tuning and ATLAS protocol when evaluating student work. Several content core teachers hold a QTEL, bilingual, and TESOL certificates as well. Students are in a co-teaching environment for English instruction with one certified ENL teachers and one content area teacher. All ICT classes have a SPED and content area, along with an ENL certified teachers for English instruction. The ENL integrated classes travel together as a group for the expanding/transitional students with 90 minutes in their core content area classes of ESL instruction. The emerging/entering/low transitioning are homogeneously grouped where they receive 4 units of ESL instruction with teacher monitoring and assessments in English with supports in their native language. Content/ESL Teams meet weekly, during school hours, to discuss formal and informal assessments, findings, and 2018-19 SCEP-P 76  evaluate student work. They also meet weekly, during extended time, to then plan, add, or edit their lessons based on their findings. This also pertains to modifying the CCLS modules to meet the student's individual needs. All commanding students are receiving 90 minutes of ENL instruction within core content area classes. Content/ENL Teams meet weekly, during school hours, to discuss formal and informal assessments, findings, and evaluate student work. They also meet weekly, during extended time, to then plan, add, or edit their lessons based on their findings. This also pertains to modifying the CCLS modules to meet the student's individual needs. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Entering/Emerging/Low transitioning receive 4 unit of standalone ESL instruction on a weekly basis. ENL instruction for Transitioning and Expanding ENLs are aligned to state mandated ELA modules for CCLS with ESL methodologies which include WIDA, focusing on the development levels of all four language skills: listening, speaking, reading and writing with 4 units of standalone ENL instruction. All ENL instruction for the ELLS is also aligned to CCSS and the NYSESLAT format. However, Entering/Emerging/Low transitioning instruction has more of a focus on building language acquisition using WIDA, new language progressions and the bilingual initiative , i-Lit, Visions, Stanford CAT rubric for speaking, Zwiers academic conversation, and components of NYS CCSS Expeditionary Learning modules and Notice and Note reading strategies. Standard based lessons are consistenly adapted to cover NYS Standard Skill based information in a way that is accessible and age-appropriate for all LEPs. To address the different student proficiency levels, differentiated instruction is practiced in all content area classes. Teachers create their lessons and units during common planning time based on formal and infomal assessments of bi-weekly Fountas and Pinell reading levels from Curriculum associates i-Ready, along with unified teacher created formative assessments, Gates MacGinitie, Curriculum Associates i-Ready, ThinkCerca, an online curriculum creator called ATLAS, Google classroom, Googledocs., Evernote, and DropBox to drive differeniated instruction and keep the lines of communication open in all content areas. Teachers differentiate the lessons by rotating student groups, station learning, student centered, modified homeworks, modified tests, modified units, UBL in the classroom to maximize learning, and rubrics based on the preious days lessons and the performance of the students. The following instructional materials are being utilized: Visions, iXL, i-Ready, Keys to Learning, NY Ready, Passwords ( vocabulary in social studies), Cicero (social studies software), Brainpop (science software), Wilson, WIDA, and Fountas Pinell reading baseline assessments. These materials utilize the simple five step process that improves vocabulary, comprehension, reading fluency as well as writing skills. These programs utilize the five step literacy routine which involves setting a schema, reading for information, demonstrating mastery, constructing meaning, and forming an opinion. Keys to Learning and Visions are textbooks that contain content based readings that incorporate scaffolding using a three pronged approach to meeting the standards: introduce, practice and assess. The student activity book reinforces state standards with practice and expansion of skills and content. In addition, each classroom contains a library that is culturally diverse, leveled and contains literature in different genres. Students have access to appropriate software aligned to standards-based core curriculum during the school day and at home for reinforcement. All programs are used to promote language development, content area instruction, and build on their depth of knowledge. Instruction is designed to accommodate newcomers, intermediate students and advanced students. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Refer to number 3 in process and 1,3,6 in programming. Besides what is stated above, the ENL teachers along with the LPT, the testing coordinator , and administration survey the students every few months to see if they have made progress in their native langugae and in English. This is done through student work, oral conversations, use of the Conversation Analysis Tool, language paraprofessionals, and online instuctional programs set to their native language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing 2018-19 SCEP-P 77  d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Through our data over the past 2 years, we have found a trend that most of our student population is not proficient or at a low level in their native language as well. Based on these findings, (using WIDA, Visions, NYS CCSS 6-8 writing rubric and 6-8 speaking standards, AMAO, NYSESLAT, MLS, etc.) we use very similar ESL methodologies with differentiated strategies to reach each student. Beyond the Free standing units of ENL and ELA instruction delivered each week by a highly qualified teacher, those students that are recently proficient 2014-2016, receive units of instruction in core content areas through integrated instruction by an ENL teacher. Students in this category receive .5 units of ENL instruction to further language development. The following strategies can be used at different times for RTI for SIFE, newcomers, Developing, Long-Term, and Former Ells depending on the content, the AMAO (EDAT), and where the child requires it based on baselines, student work, and skills acquired. Whether they are a newcomer, labeled SIFE, LTE (7 years), or commanding, we utilize the following steps to ensure that every child is learning: 1. Focus on NYSESLAT of measurement for all modalities using claim, anchor, language purpose and function, and ELA construction. Using student data and work to drive instruction when reviewing tasks and language objectives in all content areas.2. Activate prior knowledge with a baseline assessment and a WIDA checklist. Once we analyize what prior information our students have, then we want to link the new information to what they already understand (build on their depth of knowledge). Not only can this stimulate student motivation, but it can also determine where to start instruction as well as lay out the next steps. Some strategies include: word associations, KWL charts, Frayer model, Zwiers academic conversation, one-to-one conferencing using WIDA, Notice and Note reading strategies, and anticipation guides. 3. Provide a print rich environment. The walls are covered with lots of visuals that correspond to text (maps, charts, signs, posters with motivational phrases, the alphabet in print and script, etc.). Seek out appropriate lower-grade texts or texts that are written for a lower reading level, high interest, low ability books, native language materials, and bilingual glossaries.4. Have the student write, illustrate, and record their own books, let them create their own picture dictionaries and flash cards, incorporate drama to act out events and stories, use interactive activities on a SMARTBoard, use manipulatives, Adobe Spark, reciprocal teaching, and teach to the multiple intelligences.5. Direct Vocabulary instruction. When using new vocabulary or explaining new concepts, various graphic organizers are utiiized such the Frayer Model and the Pave Procedure (Prediction-Association-Verification-Evaluation). The teacher has the child illustrate, rephrase, define in context, and simplify the explanation so as not to confuse the student. The teacher uses intonation and pauses for emphasis, and read alouds to ensure that they are hearing academic language daily. 6. To ensure understanding, the teacher asks higher order (probing) questions by avoiding Yes/No answers. Instead, ask that students summarize what they understood. Increase your wait time, because the student will need extra time to process the question, think of the answer, they find the words they need in English. The teacher provides multiple opportunities to demonstrate understanding (instead of writing: explain, act out, discuss, defend, draw, compare, predict, etc.). Emphasize formative assessment versus evaluative assessment and individualize what we ask the student to do. Portable translator devices are also in a few rooms to ensure understanding.7. The teacher stresses the importance of social skills through the Leader in Me process that the student needs in order to interact productively with others. Through the NYS ELA modules on engageny.org, the teacher stresses the importance of being able to work in groups, taking turns, and encouraging one another to provide the foundation for higher-order thinking in collaborative groups. The teacher also looks at Habit 6 (Synorgize) from the Leader in Me process to push social interactions. 8. The teacher tries to build the native language content and literacy instruction in order to build on English. The teacher uses Visions, i-Ready (during the week) and the ELL teacher uses Hello English (during Saturday time). The SIFE student works on pre-reading, during reading, and post-reading strategies from the 6 shifts in literacy, WIDA, and new langugae progressions and the bilingual intiative. Use of graphic organizers, the SmartBoard, Elmos, laptops, ipads, Nao robots, Choreograph Programming, and Promethian Tables are very helpful to make learning visual and incorporate thinking skills that can be done without any writing. The teachers also incorporate morphology strategies, contextual analysis, cognate charts, co-op group language models and knowledge of cross-linguistic relationships. However, in order to meet the needs of a SIFE student, the teacher is required to bridge the gap between their home culture learning context and their new classroom context. The teacher does this by shifting instruction to support the student to learn new knowledge in a familiar context. Also, by using reading logs and journals portfolios to incorporate reading and writing is another way to ensure student comprehension. 9. The teacher uses strategies that weave together language and content instruction, such as the SIOP model (Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol), read alouds, and components of the NYSESLAT and NYS 6-8 grade writing rubric. Teachers start with the concrete ( if applicable, then formally assess the student's reading level by using Fountas and Pinnell) then build to the abstract. Teachers try to relate material to students' prior knowledge and experience. What students don't have you can 2018-19 SCEP-P 78  try to create it for them through visuals or by using technology.10. The teachers hold the students to high, yet realistic, expectations at the beginning of the year. This is done through creating student WIGS/ SMART goals (for SWD) and through the their Leadership Notebooks for all students. The teacher than assists students in tracking their progress (or lack of) of their academic and personal goal. This is to empower each student to be responsible to reach their goals and to assess their effort to reach the goal. The student will strive to reach higer ones as the year goes on through celebrations (e.g., test grades, class shout outs, work on the "class fridge", "glows and grows" student reflections, featured gallery walks displaying the work, etc.). The teacher models the process first on how to create the goal as to alliviate confusion by creating ones that are unrealistic. The teachers expect success for all students, supplies them with tools from the Leader in Me program, remains optimistic, and offers to help as needed. We know that through the Leader in Me process, language and academic scaffolding that every child will gain the self-confidence to be successful. Supplemental programs includes literacy and math tutoring, as well as homework help and additional instructional support in their native language if needed with a certified TESOL or ESL licensed teacher in a variety of content areas. Our LTEs and newly proficent ENLs will use i-Ready as an extension to the NYS CCLS modules. Many classroom activities address the WIDA, New language progressions and the bilingual initiative, and Bloom's Taxonomy, as well as , the RTI model which monitors the levels of intellectual behavior important in learning and groups them in three target areas of intervention. Students can also receive Supplemental Education Services (SES) through Sports and Arts or Lifelines in mathematics and literacy support at an after school program during the week and weekend. During the months of November through May, we also offer a Saturday Title III program for ENL language acquisition. Emphasis is based upon life skills, the Leader in Me Program, social interactions, navigating higher order text, and the language of examinations. Student assessments and teacher reflections are ongoing. They include baseline assessments, pretest, unit assessments, oral presentations, WIDA checklist, project evaluations, Rubrics, Skedula, Leadership Notebooks, Journals, teacher’s observations, one-to-one conferencing, the Tuning and ATLAS protocol, and a post test. Newcomers who speak Arabic, Mandarin, and/or Cantonese are given a translator, dictionary, and/or translated versions of the exam for content area tests. Translators are obtained through the NYC DOE translation service if we require more assistance. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The core curriculum for ENL-SWD is a modifications version of Pearson's I-Lit with components of reading strategies from the book Notice and Note. Development of Conversation● Conversation Bricks to support theory of Academic Conversation (Jeff Zweirs)ESL Dept. Goal: to increase Language Acquisition: Accountable Talk Stems written on brickswith student understanding that "bricks" build their foundation for conversation anddevelopment of academic vocabulary● Express ideas in discussion using Accountable Talk● Build on ideas in discussion● Center on student engagement – pose questions, present claims and findings.● Acknowledging new information expressed by peersWriting● MOSL Data indicated SWD/ELL lack of organization, evidence, and justification in writing.From that, there was the creation of a writing unit (not included in the Pearson curriculum).Perspectives for the essays were created by students based on the thinking and evidencerecorded on the conversation bricks and connected to Pearson Essential Questions. TheOutline for Writing included Introduction with a hook and an overview, the 1st BodyParagraph focused on Informational Text with evidence and justification, the 2nd BodyParagraph focused on the Fictional Text from Pearson’s curriculum with evidence andjustification, and finally a concluding paragraph. Quick Writes were used to expand onstudent thinking. Peer-editing check lists were used and differentiated graphic organizerswere used to support students at different levels of need.▪ Analysis of two different forms of text that address similar ideas/topics tosupport discussion and writing.▪ Citing text-based evidence to analyze informational and narrative texts.▪ Peer-editing to engage students in each other’s learning, providefeedback/revisions to writing▪ Use and understanding of writing rubric to produce a clear and coherent pieceof writing.▪ Conferred with student in regard to the writing piece, and provided areflection sheet to monitor understanding and allow for goal setting/nextsteps.Modified Close Reading of I-Lit texts by introducing sign posts (Notice & Note: Strategies for CloseReading by Kylene Beers and Robert E. Probst)● Turning responsibility of questioning the text over to students to support independence● How dialogue reveals characters perspectives● Analysis of theme in relation to how it impacts characters actionsEtymology, Cognates, and Individualized Vocabulary graphic organizers employed to supportvocabulary development with particular focus on Tier 2 and Tier 3 words. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 2018-19 SCEP-P 79  All classes are generally heterogeneous [mixed proficiency], however, our self contained/ICT/and one gen-ed class are aligned on all three grades for movement of students as per CR154, RTI and Special Education reform in regards to flexible programming. After placement and the Language Proficiency Team reviews student data, then we can create sub groups for RTI (small tiers) and ENL integrated content as per their levels for interventions. Our internal data shows growth in both language acquisition and academics. However, our baseline assessments from the team using oral interviews with small a writing sample shows that many of our students are not proficient or on grade level in their native language which hinders English academic language. The students travel together as a group by class. Based on the level of language proficiency, ieps and RTI tiered interventions units of core content instruction vary. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Through our data over the past 2 years, we have found a trend that most of our student population is not proficient or at a low level in their native language as well. Based on these findings, (using WIDA, Visions, NYS CCSS 6-8 writing rubric and 6-8 speaking standards, AMAO, NYSESLAT, MLS, etc.) we use very similar ESL methodologies with differentiated strategies to reach each student. Beyond the Free standing units of ENL and ELA instruction delivered each week by a highly qualified teacher, those students that are recently proficient 2015-2017, receive units of instruction in core content areas through integrated instruction by an ENL teacher. Students in this category receive .5 units of ENL instruction to further language development. Whether they are a newcomer, labeled SIFE, LTE (7 years), or commanding, we utilize the following steps to ensure that every child is learning: 1. Focus on NYSESLAT targets of measurement for all modalities using claim, anchor, language purpose and function, and ELA construction. Using student data and work to drive instruction when reviewing tasks and language objectives in all content areas. Development of Conversation● Conversation Bricks to support theory of Academic Conversation (Jeff Zweirs)ESL Dept. Goal: to increase Language Acquisition: Accountable Talk Stems written on brickswith student understanding that "bricks" build their foundation for conversation anddevelopment of academic vocabulary● Express ideas in discussion using Accountable Talk● Build on ideas in discussion● Center on student engagement – pose questions, present claims and findings.● Acknowledging new information expressed by peersWriting● MOSL Data indicated SWD/ELL lack of organization, evidence, and justification in writing.From that, there was the creation of a writing unit (not included in the Pearson curriculum).Perspectives for the essays were created by students based on the thinking and evidencerecorded on the conversation bricks and connected to Pearson Essential Questions. TheOutline for Writing included Introduction with a hook and an overview, the 1st BodyParagraph focused on Informational Text with evidence and justification, the 2nd BodyParagraph focused on the Fictional Text from Pearson’s curriculum with evidence andjustification, and finally a concluding paragraph. Quick Writes were used to expand onstudent thinking. Peer-editing check lists were used and differentiated graphic organizerswere used to support students at different levels of need.▪ Analysis of two different forms of text that address similar ideas/topics tosupport discussion and writing.▪ Citing text-based evidence to analyze informational and narrative texts.▪ Peer-editing to engage students in each others' learning, providefeedback/revisions to writing▪ Use and understanding of writing rubric to produce a clear and coherent pieceof writing.▪ Conferred with student in regard to the writing piece, and provided areflection sheet to monitor understanding and allow for goal setting/nextsteps.Modified Close Reading of I-Lit texts by introducing sign posts (Notice & Note: Strategies for CloseReading by Kylene Beers and Robert E. Probst)● Turning responsibility of questioning the text over to students to support independence● How dialogue reveals characters perspectives● Analysis of theme in relation to how it impacts characters actionsEtymology, Cognates, and Individualized Vocabulary graphic organizers employed to supportvocabulary development with particular focus on Tier 2 and Tier 3 words. 2. Activate prior knowledge with a baseline assessment and a WIDA checklist. Once we analyize what prior information our students have, then we want to link the new information to what they already understand (build on their depth of knowledge). Not only can this stimulate student motivation, but it can also determine where to start instruction as well as lay out the next steps. Some strategies include: word associations, KWL charts, Frayer model, Marzanos 6-steps to writing, one-to-one conferencing using WIDA, and anticipation guides. 3. Provide a print rich environment. The walls are covered with lots of visuals that correspond to text (maps, charts, signs, posters with motivational phrases, the alphabet in print and script, etc.). Seek out appropriate lower-grade texts or texts that are written for a lower reading level, high interest, low ability books, native language materials, and bilingual glossaries.4. Have the student write, illustrate, and record their own books, let them create their own picture dictionaries and flash cards, incorporate drama to act out events and stories, use interactive activities on a SMARTBoard, use manipulatives, reciprocal 2018-19 SCEP-P 80  teaching, and teach to the multiple intelligences.5. Direct Vocabulary instruction. When using new vocabulary or explaining new concepts, various graphic organizers are utilized such the Frayer Model and the Pave Procedure (Prediction-Association-Verification-Evaluation). The teacher has the child illustrate, rephrase, define in context, and simplify the explanation so as not to confuse the student. The teacher uses intonation and pauses for emphasis, and read alouds to ensure that they are hearing academic language daily. 6. To ensure understanding, the teacher asks higher order (probing) questions by avoiding Yes/No answers. Instead, ask that students summarize what they understood. Increase your wait time, because the student will need extra time to process the question, think of the answer, they find the words they need in English. The teacher provides multiple opportunities to demonstrate understanding (instead of writing: explain, act out, discuss, defend, draw, compare, predict, etc.). Emphasize formative assessment versus evaluative assessment and individualize what we ask the student to do. Portable translator devices are also in a few rooms to ensure understanding.7. The teacher stresses the importance of social skills through the Leader in Me process that the student needs in order to interact productively with others. Through the NYS ELA modules on engageny.org, the teacher stresses the importance of being able to work in groups, taking turns, and encouraging one another to provide the foundation for higher-order thinking in collaborative groups. The teacher also looks at Habit 6 (Synergize) from the Leader in Me process to push social interactions. 8. The teacher tries to build the native language content and literacy instruction in order to build on English. The teacher uses Visions, i-Ready (during the week) and the ELL coordinator uses Hello English (during Saturday extended time). The SIFE student works on pre-reading, during reading, and post-reading strategies from the 6 shifts in literacy, WIDA, and new language progressions and the bi-lingual initiative. Use of graphic organizers, the SmartBoard, Elmos, laptops, ipads, and Promethian Tables are very helpful to make learning visual and incorporate thinking skills that can be done without any writing. The teachers also incorporate morphology strategies, contextual analysis, cognate charts, co-op group language models and knowledge of cross-linguistic relationships. However, in order to meet the needs of a SIFE student, the teacher is required to bridge the gap between their home culture learning context and their new classroom context. The teacher does this by shifting instruction to support the student to learn new knowledge in a familiar context. Also, by using reading logs and journals portfolios to incorporate reading and writing is another way to ensure student comprehension. 9. The teaching uses strategies that weave together language and content instruction, such as the SIOP model (Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol), read alouds, and components of the NYSESLAT and NYS 6-8 grade writing rubric. Teachers start with the concrete ( if applicable, then formally assess the student's reading level by using Fountas and Pinnell) then build to the abstract. Teachers try to relate material to students' prior knowledge and experience. What students don't have you can try to create it for them through visuals or by using technology.10. The teachers hold the students to high, yet realistic, expectations at the beginning of the year. This is done through creating student SMART goals (for SWD) and through the their Leadership Notebooks for all students. The teacher than assists students in tracking their progress (or lack of) of their academic and personal goal. This is to empower each student to be responsible to reach their goals and to assess their effort to reach the goal. The student will strive to reach higher ones as the year goes on through celebrations (e.g., test grades, class shout outs, work on the "class fridge", "glows and grows" student reflections, featured gallery walks displaying the work, etc.). The teacher models the process first on how to create the goal as to alleviate confusion by creating ones that are unrealistic. The teachers expect success for all students, supplies them with tools from the Leader in Me program, remains optimistic, and offers to help as needed. We know that through the Leader in Me process, language and academic scaffolding that every child will gain the self-confidence to be successful. Supplemental programs for ELLs during the school week: Students who require extra help are mandated to stay for an extra unit of ESL instruction (extended day program). Extended time includes literacy and math tutoring, as well as homework help and additional instructional support in their native language if needed with a certified TESOL or ESL licensed teacher in a variety of content areas. Our LTEs and newly proficient ELLs will use i-Ready as an extension to the NYS CCLS modules. Vision, MyOn, Entering/low transitioning/emerging and SIFE (not LTE) during extended time with a certified TESOL or ESL licensed teacher in a variety of content areas. The activities address the WIDA, New language progressions and the bilingual initiative, and Bloom's Taxonomy, as well as , the RTI model which monitors the levels of intellectual behavior important in learning and groups them in three target areas of intervention. Students can also receive Supplemental Education Services (SES) through Sports and Arts or Lifelines in mathematics and literacy support at an after school program during the week and weekend. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? 2018-19 SCEP-P 81  We have added components of the close reading strategies for the bilingual: using components of Notice and Note reading strategies to bridge Expeditionary learning for entering and emerging ENL learners to further develop comprehension skills through Spanish literature and informational text. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our student population is comprised of former ENLs and current ENLs. All school programs are offered and accessible to all students in the building. Through our data over the past 2 years, we have found a trend that most of our student population is not proficient or at a low level in their native language as well. Based on these findings, (using WIDA, Visions, NYS CCSS 6-8 writing rubric and 6-8 speaking standards, AMAO, NYSESLAT, MLS, etc.) we use very similar ESL methodologies with differentiated strategies to reach each student. Beyond the Free standing units of ENL and ELA instruction delivered each week by a highly qualified teacher, those students that are recently proficient 2014-2016, receive units of instruction in core content areas through integrated instruction by an ENL teacher. Students in this category receive .5 units of ENL instruction to further language development. Whether they are a newcomer, labeled SIFE, LTE (7 years), or commanding, we utilize the following steps to ensure that every child is learning: 1. Focus on NYSESLAT phase 2 targets of measurement for all modalities using claim, anchor, language purpose and function, and ELA construction. Using student data and work to drive instruction when reviewing tasks and language objectives in all content areas. 2. Activate prior knowledge with a baseline assessment and a WIDA checklist. Once we analyze what prior information our students have, then we want to link the new information to what they already understand (build on their depth of knowledge). Not only can this stimulate student motivation, but it can also determine where to start instruction as well as lay out the next steps. Some strategies include: word associations, KWL charts, Frayer model, Marzanos 6-steps to writing, one-to-one conferencing using WIDA, and anticipation guides. 3. Provide a print rich environment. The walls are covered with lots of visuals that correspond to text (maps, charts, signs, posters with motivational phrases, the alphabet in print and script, etc.). Seek out appropriate lower-grade texts or texts that are written for a lower reading level, high interest, low ability books, native language materials, and bilingual glossaries.4. Have the student write, illustrate, and record their own books, let them create their own picture dictionaries and flash cards, incorporate drama to act out events and stories, use interactive activities on a SMARTBoard, use manipulatives, reciprocal teaching, and teach to the multiple intelligences.5. Direct Vocabulary instruction. When using new vocabulary or explaining new concepts, various graphic organizers are utilized such the Frayer Model and the Pave Procedure (Prediction-Association-Verification-Evaluation). The teacher has the child illustrate, rephrase, define in context, and simplify the explanation so as not to confuse the student. The teacher uses intonation and pauses for emphasis, and read alouds to ensure that they are hearing academic language daily. 6. To ensure understanding, the teacher asks higher order (probing) questions by avoiding Yes/No answers. Instead, ask that students summarize what they understood. Increase your wait time, because the student will need extra time to process the question, think of the answer, they find the words they need in English. The teacher provides multiple opportunities to demonstrate understanding (instead of writing: explain, act out, discuss, defend, draw, compare, predict, etc.). Emphasize formative assessment versus evaluative assessment and individualize what we ask the student to do. Portable translator devices are also in a few rooms to ensure understanding.7. The teacher stresses the importance of social skills through the Leader in Me process that the student needs in order to interact productively with others. Through the NYS ELA modules on engageny.org, the teacher stresses the importance of being able to work in groups, taking turns, and encouraging one another to provide the foundation for higher-order thinking in collaborative groups. The teacher also looks at Habit 6 (Synergize) from the Leader in Me process to push social interactions. 8. The teacher tries to build the native language content and literacy instruction in order to build on English. The teacher uses LeapFrog, Visions, i-Ready (during the week) and the ELL coordinator uses Rosetta Stone (during Saturday extended time). The SIFE student works on pre-reading, during reading, and post-reading strategies from the 6 shifts in literacy, WIDA, and new language progressions and the bi-lingual initiative. Use of graphic organizers, the SmartBoard, Elmos, laptops, ipads, and Promethian Tables are very helpful to make learning visual and incorporate thinking skills that can be done without any writing. The teachers also incorporate morphology strategies, contextual analysis, cognate charts, co-op group language models and knowledge of cross-linguistic relationships. However, in order to meet the needs of a SIFE student, the teacher is required to bridge the gap between their home culture learning context and their new classroom context. The teacher does this by shifting instruction to support the student to learn 2018-19 SCEP-P 82  new knowledge in a familiar context. Also, by using reading logs and journals portfolios to incorporate reading and writing is another way to ensure student comprehension. 9. The teaching uses strategies that weave together language and content instruction, such as the SIOP model (Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol), read alouds, and components of the NYSESLAT and NYS 6-8 grade writing rubric. Teachers start with the concrete ( if applicable, then formally assess the student's reading level by using Fountas and Pinnell) then build to the abstract. Teachers try to relate material to students' prior knowledge and experience. What students don't have you can try to create it for them through visuals or by using technology.10. The teachers hold the students to high, yet realistic, expectations at the beginning of the year. This is done through creating student SMART goals (for SWD) and through the their Leadership Notebooks for all students. The teacher than assists students in tracking their progress (or lack of) of their academic and personal goal. This is to empower each student to be responsible to reach their goals and to assess their effort to reach the goal. The student will strive to reach higer ones as the year goes on through celebrations (e.g., test grades, class shout outs, work on the "class fridge", "glows and grows" student reflections, featured gallery walks displaying the work, etc.). The teacher models the process first on how to create the goal as to alliviate confusion by creating ones that are unrealistic. The teachers expect success for all students, supplies them with tools from the Leader in Me program, remains optimistic, and offers to help as needed. We know that through the Leader in Me process, language and academic scaffolding that every child will gain the self-confidence to be successful. Supplemental programs for ELLs during the school week: Students who require extra help are mandated to stay for an extra unit of ESL instruction (extended day program). Extended time includes literacy and math tutoring, as well as homework help and additional instructional support in their native language if needed with a certified TESOL or ESL liscenced teacher in a variety of content areas. Our LTEs and newly proficent ELLs will use i-Ready as an extension to the NYS CCLS modules. Vision, MyOn, Beginners/low intermediate/emerging and SIFE (not LTE) during extended time with a certified TESOL or ESL liscenced teacher in a variety of content areas. The activities address the WIDA, New language progressions and the bi-lingual initiative, and Bloom's Taxonomy, as well as , the RTI model which monitors the levels of intellectual behavior important in learning and groups them in three target areas of intervention. Students can also receive Supplemental Education Services (SES) through Sports and Arts or Lifelines in mathematics and literacy support at an after school program during the week and weekend. During the months of November through April, we also offer a Title III Saturday program for ELL language acquisition. This program will also provide students with sports and arts. Emphasis is based upon life skills, the Leader in Me Program, social interactions, navigating higher order text, and the language of examinations. Student assessments and teacher reflections are ongoing. They include baseline assessments, pretest, unit assessments, oral presentations, WIDA checklist, project evaluations, Rubrics, Skedula, Leadership Notebooks, Journals, teacher’s observations, one-to-one conferencing, the Tuning and ATLAS protocol, and a post test. Newcomers who speak Arabic, Mandarin, and/or Cantonese are given a translator, dictionary, and/or translated versions of the exam for content area tests. Translators are obtained through the NYC DOE translation service if we require more assistance. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. As a schoolwide focus on technology, the majority of core content areas are taught using google classroom to prepare our student population for the 21st century skills in the field. Students create google docs, sharing files in google drive, upload assignments to google classroom, use the snipping tool and/or loop tool to enhance or capture work, school created and monitored google student email accounts and google slides for easier sharing capability than power point. ELLS, SWD ELLS and former ENLs also choose from a talent pool specific to technology that meets 5 periods a week: graphic arts, 3d printing, coding, Nao robotics coding, Lego robotics, digital photography, hardware and software development, and fit bit tracking for health/fitness. 1. Focus on NYSESLAT phase 2 targets of measurement for all modalities using claim, anchor, language purpose and function, and ELA construction. Using student data and work to drive instruction when reviewing tasks and language objectives in all content areas. Students use cell phones and/or hand held video recording device to capture 'turn-talk' discussions for student reflection on language proficiency. 2. Provide a print rich environment. The walls are covered with lots of visuals that correspond to text (maps, charts, signs, posters with motivational phrases, the alphabet in print and script, etc.). Seek out appropriate lower-grade texts or texts that are written for a lower reading level, high interest, low ability books, native language materials, and bilingual glossaries. Along with the use of Promethan tables for station work to expand on their content vocabulary and interactive assignments tailored to the task at hand. 4. Interactive Samrtboards, Elmos, and 1:1 laptops Newcomers who speak Arabic, Mandarin, and/or Cantonese are given a translator, dictionary, and/or translated 2018-19 SCEP-P 83  versions of the exam for content area tests. Google translate and handheld devices are used to endure that students understand the content object and learning object in all content areas. See above. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? . Newcomers who speak Arabic, Mandarin, and/or Cantonese are given extra time, dictionary, scaffolded work, and/or translated versions of the exam for content area tests. Google translate and handheld devices are used to endure that students understand the content object and learning object in all content areas. Results from student groupings, teacher observations, student leadership notebooks, NYSESLAT, portfolios, and oral presentations. See above. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Our student population is comprised of former ENLs and current ENLs. All school programs are offered and accessible to all students in the building. Through our data over the past 2 years, we have found a trend that most of our student population is not proficient or at a low level in their native language as well. Based on these findings, (using WIDA, Visions, NYS CCSS 6-8 writing rubric and 6-8 speaking standards, AMAO, NYSESLAT, MLS, etc.) we use very similar ESL methodologies with differentiated strategies to reach each student. Beyond the Free standing units of ENL and ELA instruction delivered each week by a highly qualified teacher, those students that are recently proficient , receive units of instruction in core content areas through integrated instruction by an ENL teacher. Students in this category receive .5 units of ENL instruction to further language development. Whether they are a newcomer, labeled SIFE, LTE (7 years), or commanding, we utlize the following steps to ensure that every child is learning: 1. Focus on NYSESLAT phase 2 targets of measurement for all modalities using claim, anchor, language purpose and function, and ELA construction. Using student data and work to drive instruction when reviewing tasks and language objectives in all content areas. 2. Activate prior knowledge with a baseline assessment and a WIDA checklist. Once we analyze what prior information our students have, then we want to link the new information to what they already understand (build on their depth of knowledge). Not only can this stimulate student motivation, but it can also determine where to start instruction as well as lay out the next steps. Some strategies include: word associations, KWL charts, Frayer model, Zwiers academic conversation, one-to-one conferencing using WIDA, and anticipation guides. 3. Provide a print rich environment. The walls are covered with lots of visuals that correspond to text (maps, charts, signs, posters with motivational phrases, the alphabet in print and script, etc.). Seek out appropriate lower-grade texts or texts that are written for a lower reading level, high interest, low ability books, native language materials, and bilingual glossaries.4. Have the student write, illustrate, and record their own books, let them create their own picture dictionaries and flash cards, incorporate drama to act out events and stories, use interactive activities on a SMARTBoard, use manipulatives, reciprocal teaching, and teach to the multiple intelligences.5. Direct Vocabulary instruction. When using new vocabulary or explaining new concepts, various graphic organizers are utilized such the Frayer Model and the Pave Procedure (Prediction-Association-Verification-Evaluation). The teacher has the child illustrate, rephrase, define in context, and simplify the explanation so as not to confuse the student. The teacher uses intonation and pauses for emphasis, and read alouds to ensure that they are hearing academic language daily. 6. To ensure understanding, the teacher asks higher order (probing) questions by avoiding Yes/No answers. Instead, ask that students summarize what they understood. Increase your wait time, because the student will need extra time to process the question, think of the answer, they find the words they need in English. The teacher provides multiple opportunities to demonstrate understanding (instead of writing: explain, act out, discuss, defend, draw, compare, predict, etc.). Emphasize formative assessment versus evaluative assessment and individualize what we ask the student to do. Portable translator devices are also in a few rooms to ensure understanding.7. The teacher stresses the importance of social skills through the Leader in Me process that the student needs in order to interact productively with others. Through the NYS ELA modules on engageny.org, the teacher stresses the importance of being able to work in groups, taking turns, and encouraging one another to provide the foundation for higher-order thinking in collaborative groups. The teacher also looks at Habit 6 (Synergize) from the Leader in Me process to push social interactions. 8. The teacher tries to build the native language content and literacy instruction in order to build on English. The teacher uses Visions, i-Ready (during the week) and the teacher uses Hello English (during Saturday extended time). The SIFE student works on pre-reading, during reading, and post-reading strategies from the 6 shifts in literacy, WIDA, and new language progressions and the bi-lingual initiative. Use of graphic organizers, the SmartBoard, Elmos, laptops, ipads, and Promethian Tables are very helpful to make learning visual and incorporate thinking skills that can be done without any writing. The teachers also incorporate morphology strategies, contextual analysis, cognate charts, co-op group language models and knowledge of cross-linguistic relationships. However, in order to meet the needs of a SIFE student, the teacher is required to bridge the gap between their home culture learning context and their new classroom context. The teacher does this by shifting instruction to support the student to learn new knowledge in a familiar context. Also, by using reading logs and journals portfolios to incorporate reading and writing is another way to ensure student comprehension. 9. The teaching uses strategies that weave together language and content instruction, such as the SIOP model (Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol), read alouds, and components of the NYSESLAT and NYS 6-8 grade writing rubric. Teachers start with the concrete ( if applicable, then formally assess the student's reading level by using Fountas and Pinnell) then build to the abstract. Teachers try to relate material to students' prior 2018-19 SCEP-P 84  knowledge and experience. What students don't have you can try to create it for them through visuals or by using technology.10. The teachers hold the students to high, yet realistic, expectations at the beginning of the year. This is done through creating student SMART goals (for SWD) and through the their Leadership Notebooks for all students. The teacher than assists students in tracking their progress (or lack of) of their academic and personal goal. This is to empower each student to be responsible to reach their goals and to assess their effort to reach the goal. The student will strive to reach higher ones as the year goes on through celebrations (e.g., test grades, class shout outs, work on the "class fridge", "glows and grows" student reflections, featured gallery walks displaying the work, etc.). The teacher models the process first on how to create the goal as to alleviate confusion by creating ones that are unrealistic. The teachers expect success for all students, supplies them with tools from the Leader in Me program, remains optimistic, and offers to help as needed. We know that through the Leader in Me process, language and academic scaffolding that every child will gain the self-confidence to be successful. Supplemental programs for ELLs during the school week: Students who require extra help are mandated to stay for an extra unit of ESL instruction (extended day program). Extended time includes literacy and math tutoring, as well as homework help and additional instructional support in their native language if needed with a certified TESOL or ESL licensed teacher in a variety of content areas. Our LTEs and newly proficent ELLs will use i-Ready as an extension to the NYS CCLS modules. Vision, MyOn, Beginners/low intermediate/emerging and SIFE (not LTE) during extended time with a certified TESOL or ESL licensed teacher in a variety of content areas. The activities address the WIDA, New language progressions and the bi-lingual initiative, and Bloom's Taxonomy, as well as , the RTI model which monitors the levels of intellectual behavior important in learning and groups them in three target areas of intervention. Students can also receive Supplemental Education Services (SES) through Sports and Arts or Life Lines in mathematics and literacy support at an after school program during the week and weekend. During the months of November through April, we also offer Title III Saturday program for ELL language acquisition. Emphasis is based upon life skills, the Leader in Me Program, social interactions, navigating higher order text, and the language of examinations. Student assessments and teacher reflections are ongoing. They include baseline assessments, pretest, unit assessments, oral presentations, WIDA checklist, project evaluations, Rubrics, Skedula, Leadership Notebooks, Journals, teacher’s observations, one-to-one conferencing, the Tuning and ATLAS protocol, and a post test. Newcomers who speak Arabic, Mandarin, and/or Cantonese are given a translator, dictionary, and/or translated versions of the exam for content area tests. Translators are obtained through the NYC DOE translation service if we require more assistance. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? As a schoolwide focus on technology, the majority of core content areas are taught using google classroom to prepare our student population for the 21st century skills in the field. Students create google docs, sharing files in google drive, upload assignments to google classroom, use the snipping tool and/or loop tool to enhance or capture work, school created and monitored google student email accounts and google slides for easier sharing capability than power point. ELLS, SWD ELLS and former ENLs also choose from a talent pool specific to technology that meets 5 periods a week: graphic arts, 3d printing, coding, Nao robotics coding, Lego robotics, digital photography, hardware and software development, and fit bit tracking for health/fitness. 1. Focus on NYSESLAT phase 2 targets of measurement for all modalities using claim, anchor, language purpose and function, and ELA construction. Using student data and work to drive instruction when reviewing tasks and language objectives in all content areas. Students use cell phones and/or hand held video recording device to capture 'turn-talk' discussions for student reflection on language procifiency. 2. Provide a print rich environment. The walls are covered with lots of visuals that correspond to text (maps, charts, signs, posters with motivational phrases, the alphabet in print and script, etc.). Seek out appropriate lower-grade texts or texts that are written for a lower reading level, high interest, low ability books, native language materials, and bilingual glossaries. Along with the use of Promethan tables for station work to expand on their content vocabulary and interactive assignments tailored to the task at hand. 4. Interactive Samrtboards, Elmos, and 1:1 laptops Newcomers who speak Arabic, Mandarin, and/or Cantonese are given a translator, dictionary, and/or translated versions of the exam for content area tests. Google translate and handheld devices are used to endure that students understand the content object and learning object in all content areas. See above. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). • Full time parent coordinator strengthens the home-school connection and refers the family to any new initiatives from DELLS and NYS.• Monthly parent meetings on Common Core Learning Standards, Grading Policies, Reading Comprehension/Math/Writing Strategies, Articulation to High School, High School Application Process,etc . Consequently, parents are better able to support their child’s learning and advocate for their academic and social emotional 2018-19 SCEP-P 85  needs.• PTA parent volunteers who support the school wherever needed • Translation services on-sight from staff members in Chinese (Mandarin and Simplified), Spanish, Arabic to explain programs offered in the community, immigration issues, and adult programs offered at the school. Saturday English Language programs for students and families as well as a summer orientation language course. along with activities for all students: MS136 ELA/Arts Highlights 2017-2018 i-Ready- Weekly rigorous, on-grade-level instruction and practice with i-Ready® and additional downloadable lessons to help meet individual student or small group needs. Students use the system for 45 minutes a week in class but are to use it independently throughout the week. Monthly progress monitoring tests are taken and reviewed for track student progress. myOn provides anytime, anywhere access to a library of more than 7,000 enhanced digital books in fiction and non-fiction and in an array of subjects. Our Pre-kindergarten through grade five scholars have the opportunity to read or listen to books and home as well as throughout the school day. This helps encourage a love for reading. With the support of the program reading to our scholars have the opportunity to complete their 60 minutes of daily reading with assistance if needed. Ilit-Our self contained/ELL population use the ilit program on ipads for 360 minutes each week during ELA instruction. This program is designed to help our students gain two or more years of reading growth in a single year, iLit is based on a research-proven instructional model.Annual Anti-Bully Poetry and Visual Arts Contest- During our annual Anti-Bully Contest our students gather to compete to recite their original poems and show their visual arts. This is different from the Poetry Jam because this is a competition where students are judged on originality, voice and presentation. This is usually done during the end of March for the Movie and speaker. The spoken word/poetry jam portion is in June.Aperture and Diversity Lens Project-Projects are separate but both are photography based. One is based on views of empathy in the surrounding neighborhood and the other is based on the gentrification of Sunset Park. A few 6th grade classes are working on these projects and will have a show at Tweed in June. The Aperture magazine will highlight our students and their work in their May magazine. Each project is a 90 minute class that meets weekly for neighborhood walks, classroom discussions, gallery walks of their work, written reflections, and a student curated work for the final pieces. ELA Parent Workshop Series- Our monthly parent workshops are a series of workshops that are dedicated to supporting student achievement by creating and partnerships within our school community and strengthening parent involvement. These are free workshops after-school and Saturdays where parents can find out what their child is learning in school and how they can support their child’s learning at home.Nao Robotics- STEM Program-AO humanoid robot. A small group of 7th graders learn to box code programs on Choreograph with 8 Nao robots. Students create logic programs, face recognition programs, and behavior timeline dances. Students have to problem solve and think tank out connectivity issues, mathematical timelines for movement, and reflect on group/individual process in the program. MS136 Math Highlights 2017-2018 Think Through Math- TTM is a research-based math intervention system designed to support students who are struggling with mathematics. The program transitions students to the rigor of the Common Core, TEKS, and other state standards and prepares them for Algebra and beyond. Weekly rigorous, on-grade-level instruction and practice with TTM and additional downloadable lessons to help meet individual student or small group needs. Students use the system for 45 minutes a week in class but are to use it independently throughout the week. The program is web-based, adaptive instruction with LIVE, state-credentialed teachers, to assist students and parents when working at home. MS136 SCHOOL HIGHLIGHTS 2017-2018 Student Lighthouse Team – Our (6-8 grade) lighthouse team meets bi-weekly to discuss their action teams. The team uses the National School Reform Check in Protocol with a student note-taker, student facilitator, and student time keeper. The team is in charge of the following action teams around the school: Teen talks with the principal, Recycling Mural, Movember Cancer Fundraiser, and assist with coordinating the school dances. Scholars have an opportunity for more than mere verbal or performance skill practice. Lighthouse Meetings embodies the ideals of reasoned argument, tolerance for divergent points of view and rigorous self-examination through debates and think tank activities around their action team. These action teams provide scholars with a way for those who hold opposing views to discuss controversial issues without descending to insult, emotional appeals or personal bias. The Leader in Me- Is a school wide model that we use to improve the performance of all other programs. Based on The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People, The Leader in Me equips students with the self-confidence and skills they need to thrive in the 21st-century economy. Every student in the school is has a weekly Leadership class that meets for 45 minutes. During that time, the students and their mentor go over the 7Habits content, leadership projects, work on personal and academic goal setting in their leadership notebook and prepare for the LIM Symposium (where our school is a tour site). Both events are in March this year and students lead tours and discussions of the building and content throughout the day. Honor Roll-Every student in the school is awarded the opportunity to be on the honor roll. We hold high standards for our students and assist them in their community building to keep our chapter alive. Students meet monthly and recruit after each marking period. Honor Roll celebrations are held each quarter for students and parents to celebrate achievements. Our MS136 Track Team is dedicated to serving our students on a year-round basis. Using 2018-19 SCEP-P 86  track and field as the hook, students are highly motivated to improve all aspects of their academic experience including behavior and attendance. Improvements in the NYC fitnessgram are evident for our track team members as well. The DOE Move To Improve and Physical Best programs and our partnership with the NY road runners are used as guides in our planning for the team which meets at least once a week in the afternoons and participates in weekend meets in the tri-state area. The Morning Basketball Program and NBA FIT clinic-is a co-ed program with MS821 that provides year round instructions, for youth development The sessions provided are rich and progressive learning styles in environment for youth, with varying comprehension levels and athletic ability. Students who attend the basketball program receive a combination of on-court training and conditioning, along with guided in-class reinforcement in gym class. Experienced instructors lead students in techniques and strategy drills, and competitive games again the staff twice a year. Students are prepared for athleticism and team work which helps them become college and career ready. Our students benefit from this program and enjoy the competition amongst their peers. CHAMPS Sports- Here at MS136 we use sports to reinforce positive behavior and a positive school environment. By using an adapted form of PBIS with LEAD requirements throughout the building our students are rewarded for positive behaviors and all of their positive interactions here in the building. Along with a unified behavioral system we have also instituted a variety of afterschool sports. As an incentive, students who achieve the least attendance issues and are successful in creating a positive learning environment are awarded with a ticket to attend the fall and spring dances as they happen. With the use of Champs and Leader in Me, we are able to reinforce positive behavior, which helps them strive to be successful in school; this in turn gives our students the confidence to keep striving for excellence. These programs help address the social emotional aspect of our building. The program also focuses on educating our student population on how to access fresh, affordable fruit, vegetables, legumes, grains, proteins and dairy. This is information is furthered through health classes where students become familiar with the five food groups and increase their awareness and appreciation of the whole and minimally processed foods, develop cooking skills and the appreciation for recipes made with fruit, vegetables, whole grains, legumes and low-fat or fat-free dairy products. Students learn how to engage their families in making healthy food choices at school, at home and in their communities; as well as associate eating healthy foods and drinking water with energy (fuel), in order to be physically active in their own way. The Center for Family Life in Sunset Park-The center is located in our building with an extensive 6th grade in-school, (all grades) afterschool and (all ages) summer Community Arts program, featuring the performing as well as visual arts. It is also the sponsor of a Summer Youth Employment Program and School-to-Work Program, and several summer day camp programs for young children and teens. The center maintains an employment counseling and job placement program for adults. Through its Family Foster Care Program, the agency has been successful in developing 15 foster family homes and matching them with natural families within the neighborhood. Through a store-front, the Center provides an emergency food program, a thrift shop and advocacy clinic to handle a variety of short-term forms of crisis intervention and assistance. • Full time parent coordinator strengthens the home-school connection and refers the family to any new initiatives from DELLS and NYS.• Monthly parent meetings on Common Core Learning Standards, Grading Policies, Reading Comprehension/Math/Writing Strategies, Articulation to High School, High School Application Process,etc . Consequently, parents are better able to support their child’s learning and advocate for their academic and social emotional needs.• PTA parent volunteers who support the school wherever needed • Translation services on-sight from staff members in Chinese (Mandarin and Simplified), Spanish, Arabic to explain programs offered in the community, immigration issues, and adult programs offered at the school. Saturday English Language programs for students and families as well as a summer orientation language course. along with activities for all students: 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? n/a 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? In 2017-2018 school year, we created a dual language class on the 6th grade, along with integrated ENL for the transitioning/expanding/commanding students. The class is taught side-by-side in Spanish for 2018-19 SCEP-P 87  science and social studies. The co-teaching model with both languages taught at the same time. Lessons may vary or require an emergent literacy approach with the native language first depending on content or task at hand. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? We consider all staff to be ENL personnel at our school based on our student population. We provide in service training to all personnel in order to enhance their appreciation and understanding of the pupils native languages and cultures and their ability to provide appropriate instructional and support services. Our professional development plan is based upon the interpretation and analysis of ELL data which is based on CRpart154.2, ELL Proficiency Reference guide, the Bilingual initiative and New Language Progressions, Visions, NYS ELA, WIDA, MyOn, SIOP, SchoolNet, Gates Mac-ginitie, Advance, NYSESLAT, Expeditionary Learning Modules, Notice and Notes close reading strategies, student engagement in metacognition and reflection in their learning using components of Leaders of their own Learning (Ron Berger), 21st Century Learning Skills and to use them to close the achievement gap, lesson study groups within departments(Jaqueline Hurd and Catherine Lewis), and components of Bridges. The calendar as of now:MS136 Professional Development Calendar 2017-2018September*Initial meeting for observations**Sept 'booster shot' on the 7habits, chancellor mandates, school protocols, language acquisition, SIOP, UBD, and school wide data protocols for looking at student work. ** PTA meeting Parent curriculum night Peer Collaborative Teachers (PCT) Baseline Cohort meetings Gill-Social Studies LeadHoffman- PCT ENL Lead CoordinatorLandau-Sci Lead Siegel- Model TCH ENL Smith- ENL Lead -Depending on need and teacher development :Professional Conferences-Teachers are asked to research what conferences they would like attend throughout the year that align to the school goals and their professional goals based on end of year conference data.****Individualized PD Plan (off site)-Sep Flexible programming**Sep Guidance HS articulation***In-house Full Staff PD-Sep 8 Curriculum alignment to school wide goals ***Sep Grade Level Leader in Me (student Leadership notebooks, infusing the 7habits more concretely cross curriculum), curriculum lessons, different forms of DDI to support tracking progress and department check points. Language acquisition strategies. ***In-House Department PLC-Sep -continuation of curriculum alignment to school wide goals (create department goals and check points)***Oct Grade level meetings for RTI, language tracking and flexible programming***Global Achievement/STEM-October The use of Google classroom, flip classroom (whole staff)October*First round of observations with a focus on 3b,3c,3d**Oct Coffee chat with 7th grade parents about High school articulation **Oct Outreach –open house for incoming parents, parent coordinators of feeder schools.**Oct SLT meeting-school wide process and the AMAO***Oct PTA meeting on Habit 1and language acquisition**Oct Peer Collaborative Teachers (PCT)-Feedback and data driven instruction.***Oct -Departmental norm grading using NYS writing rubrics in all content areas Each month whole staff meetings consist of a rotating grade level, departmental data, and social emotional meeting (leader in me) to work through the inquiry process and provide feedback to staff and students in a collaborative way. ENL/Literacy:All ENL teachers are state certified In addition, teachers will participate in professional development that focuses on • incorporating ESL strategies into the EngageNY Expeditionary Learning modules. • scaffolding instruction in literacy • tracking language acquisition (WIDA) and the language proficiency • Implement MyOn technology based programs to support reading development for our newcomers. • The Bilingual Common Core Framework• New Language Progressions and Bilingual Initiatives• CALLA and Standford's Conversation Analysis Tool focusing on academic conversationsMathematics:Teachers will participate in professional development that focuses on • scaffolding instruction in mathematics using CMP3 and EngageNy units of study• the effective use of math strategy charts • the effective use of word walls to support teaching and learning and SIOP lesson 2018-19 SCEP-P 88  planning The principal, assistant principals, LPT, SBST, RTI team, ELL Coordinator, Literacy Coach, Math Coach, and Parent Coordinator attend several ELL methodology focused meetings throughout the year. For example: the assistant principal, ELL coordinator, and Parent coordinator were an integral part of the AAELL (Promoting Partnerships Among Families, Schools and Communities: Accelerating Achievement for English Language Learners) cohort research group that helped to provide data to the document. All staff members participate in weekly professional learning communities (using ATLAS and/or Tuning protocols for looking at student work, Skedula, SIOP, Leader in Me, WIDA, and CCLS) focusing on student intervention needs regarding language academic, formal assessments and emotional deficits. A support model has been developed so that all teachers target a similar population for academic intervention; all teams consist of general, special, and ESL pedagogues. Several teachers in all content areas have attended a series of professional development through the NYC Office of ELLs, QTEL, and TSOL. We have been in contact with the offices of ELLs to look into in-house professional development to ensure that all teachers have the mandated 7.5 hours of ESL methodologies and have sent out information on the Intensive Teaching Institute I.T.I to our staff that offers a bilingual extension from participating universities that would ensure that more members of our staff are highly qualified to service our current student population. Three core content area teachers (SS/ENL/SCI) 2017-2018 Peer Collaborative Teachers. This team attends bi-monthly as well as weekly professional development meetings within District 15 to discuss POP (Problems of Practice) and ongoing mentoring from Teacher Leadership to include the GROW model, questioning techniques to further enhance instruction, Growth Mindset, and facilitate on-site professional workshops for new and veteran staff in an informal manner. Teacher teams promoting the implementation of the CCLS and the instructional shifts:• Departmental instructional staff members engage in 45 minutes weekly of common planning. They review and revise lesson plans to ensure alignment to curriculum maps and are reflective of the instructional shifts. Various resources are used such as, Rubicon Atlas; CALLA handbook, SIOP, Expeditionary Learning, Webb’s Depth of Knowledge, and the CCLS. For example, fluency in math (multiplication) has increased based on school-wide implementation and tracking in leadership classes which demonstrate consistency of practice for student achievement. • All pedagogues engage in Monthly collaborative inquiry teams to do a comprehensive analysis of the core programs to identify missing standards, materials, resources and differentiated activities for each teaching point. Areas identified are then modified in Goggledocs. Student work is then analyzed upon completion of unit to determine if revisions impacted student achievement. For example, the ICT ESL/ELA class has revamped CC NYC DOE’s unit and rubrics on Bronx Masquerade to further align with the instructional shifts and student outcomes required to be successful. ● Instructional staff engages in 45 minutes of professional learning chosen by the PL team that considers needs assessment, feedback from administrators, and Measures of Teachers Practice (MOTP). Professional learning sessions are facilitated by teacher leaders and administrators. In addition, teachers participate in weekly self- driven professional learning sessions through ARIS learn and the Leader in Me website. For example, staff has attended several professional development sessions and conferences on topics such as: accountable talk, multiple entry points, SIFE, CSR, formative assessments, and ICT models, etc. Use of data within teacher teams to improve instruction:• Departmental teams use unit assessments, benchmarks, student work, iep at a glance, and item skills analysis from state exams to categorize students into 3 tiers. Students that are in Tier 2 and 3 receive RTI services from an ELA and math specialists. In addition, teacher teams use data to drive instruction, to determine small group instruction, provide corrective instruction and acquire knowledge student strengths and needs. Currently 15 Students receive targeted instruction on a consistent needs basis to work one-on-one with an in-house AIS teacher on academic, social, and emotional skills. The progress is monitored through teacher reports, progress reports, parent communication, and computer based data. Structures to support distributive leadership:• Therefore, we had a lead teacher in each department (ELA/ENL/Math/SS/SCI). Five self-selected staff members took the initiative to participate in the Teacher Leadership Program offered by the DOE. These leaders have taken ownership of the following areas:a) Facilitating individualized professional learning workshops for new and veteran staff members focusing on their differentiated instructional needs.b) Meet with the principal weekly to support the needs of these teachers.c) Inter-visitation cycles Staff members have made key decisions in each department when they were required to step up. Action and teacher teams have had a positive impact on student learning. The staff also created a “Leader of Leaders” notebook and medal to recognize best practices of staff members. The medal and notebook is handed out to a new recipient each Monday at the beginning of the whole staff meeting with a brief description as to why that staff member was selected. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include 2018-19 SCEP-P 89  how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Both guidance counselors are DASA certified, speak many different languages, and meet with feeder schools in October to start the transition discussions from elementary to middle school. We also hold several orientations for parents and incoming 6th grade students during the school year and summer months prior to their first year. We then try to match up incoming students with 7th and 8th graders or teacher mentors to alleviate the transition in middle school. The guidance counselors hold High Articulation meetings in native languages and school trips to the high schools prior to selections for both students and their parents to attend. All staff are required to fill out an OP20 form along with the off-site agenda and hand it in to the payroll secretary within 24 hours of attendance. Each form is documented and kept on record for professional development hours, attendance, and 175 UFT hours. Every Monday is a whole staff PD, documented with signed attendance and agendas delivered in departmental or grade level break out sessions dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. For all English as a new language teachers, the department is comprised of 6 teachers that spend more than 90% of their professional development hours dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The LPT and SBST meet often to review student data as per and annual/tri annual for a SWD ELL or ELLs that may have been referred to the team by teacher's formative assessments. Scheduled one-to-one conferences with parents or guardians of ELLs in all subgroups are scheduled through out the year to discuss goals of the program, their English language proficiency results, and progress (lack of) made with school staff to sufficiently inform parents about their child's language development in all content areas . Meetings are conducted with someone on the LPT that is qualified to translate in the language or form of communication that the parent or guardian best understands. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Administration, the Language Proficiency Team, and the ENL teachers review student data from formative assessments in the four modalities on a monthly basis to ensure that the child is in the right placement and to inform instruction. This data is then used at the conference with the parent/guardian regarding ELL progress and placement throughout the school year. The school has also transitioned to Student Led Conferences with staff as advisor on the side. This for the most part, our parents support the concept of student-led conferences, though some support, they are eager to hear their child speak about their learning process in middle school. The school provides parents with a list of academic specific questions to ask their child in a variety of languages to support this process. them with slight reservations. Every Tuesday from 2:20-3:35pm is set aside for parent outreach. Whether it be phone calls (documented with a phone log) or in person meetings to discuss "glows" and "grows" feedback. Parent workshops are held at the school every month with different topics. In September, it was a welcome to the school with a overview of the schedule up to January. The topic for each month are as follows: -October: welcome and a discussion with Christine Farrell, D15 Family Leadership Coordinator -November: Attendance, how to contact someone in the main office, and important paperwork for the school. -December: An deeper dive into the Leader in Me program and the 7 habits content. -January: Progress reports and where your child should be academically at by this time of year. Parent survey on future topics -Feb-June: TBD based on parent survey. 2018-19 SCEP-P 90  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Improvement in communication with parents, which resulted in a 97% satisfaction rating regarding the school keeping them informed about their child’s academic and behavioral progress.● Flexible scheduling to provide the opportunity for all self-contained/ICT/SWD-ELL students to move into least restrictive/more restrictive environment. This has resulted in several students moving after the SBST and LPT team’s analysis. Additionally, this resulted in the movement for ICT students in mainstream environment. This is communicated through a full time IEP teacher throughout the year and at every IEP meeting. Consequently, 90% of the parents surveyed on the NYC Survey (Learning Environment Survey) are satisfied with the educational planning and IEP development process at the school.● Improved instructional outcomes for students in Common Core aligned tasks. 8.2% or higher on i-Ready have improved from last year and are reaching grade level target, also with 16% of 8th grade and 20% of 6th grade students achieving level 3 and achieving level 4 on their Science performance tasks (7th grade is still tallying results), and 6% of 6th grade students, 12% of the 7th grade, and 7% of the 8th grade achieving level 3 on their Social Studies Document Based Questions performance tasks. ● Students who held a leadership role in the building showed an increase on the 2015-2016 NYSESLAT by a minimum of 14 points. With an 16 point increase for 2016-2017 school year.-Increased student participation in school activities. Students are given tickets to attend the dance based on attendance, class work, and behavior. Data from last year to this year, shows a 20% increase in these areas, even with the current weather. ● Increased parent involvement by 7%. ● Student Attendance has improved from 94.7% last year to 96% this year which represents a, 1.3% increase.● Teacher attendance is 97%, which leads to continuity of instruction and improved student learning.● 2015-2017 Suspensions decreased. Last year there were 57 suspensions, this year 21 suspensions. This reflects a 7 % overall decrease. 2018-19 SCEP-P 91 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Eric Sackler, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-P 92  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Charles O. Dewey School DBN: 15K136 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Eric Sackler Title Principal Sarah Moteleone Assistant Principal Damaris Garcia Parent Coordinator Xin Rong ENL/Bilingual Teacher Mr. Ramirez Parent Nancy Landau Teacher/Subject Area Elvin Ventura Teacher/Subject Area Harriet Hoffman Daniel Siegal Alex Jelcic Anita Skopp Tatyana Ulubabova Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Instructional/compliance support Malak Alethari Other School Counselor Juliet Gochnour Other IEP Teacher Claire Walsh Other AIS Coordinator Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/26/2018 06/26/20187 06/26/2018 06/26/2018 9/20/17 06/26/2018 06/26/2018 06/26/2018 06/26/2018 06/26/2018 06/26/2018 06/26/2018 06/26/2018 06/26/2018 06/26/2018 2018-19 SCEP-P 93  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 15K136 School Name: Charles O. Dewey Superintendent: Anita Skop The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Damaris Garcia Parent Coordinator Yes 11/17/2016 Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Upon arrival in our building, the home language identification survey IHLIS) is given to parents in the home language spoken. We look at Part III of the HLIS where parent indicates the oral and written language in which they would like to receive information from the school. This information is first indicated on the QADM in ATS. There are several reports in ATS that we utilize including the UPPG that indicates parent language of choice and written preference. We also have binders by grade and class where we keep copies of HILS with parent language of preference. The language of choice is also on the student emergency card. Based on this information, all parent interviews upon child's entrance and thereafter all conducted/interpreted in language of choice. For Parent Teacher Conferences, translators from the Big Word are employed to interpret in native language. Phone translation services are interpreted in native language, letters translated by parent coordinator and school staff, Google Translate is used to interpret as well. Language Identification Guides are used in the main office and given to School Safety Agents at Security Desk as well as the over-the -phone card with information to obtain and over the phone interpreter Major findings: 85% of parents speak Spanish as their first language and most prefer communication in both English and Spanish. Approximately 10% preference notices to be sent home in 2018-19 SCEP-P 94  English/Arabic and English/Chinese. 5% prefer English and French. These findings were reported to the school community at the beginning of the school year but change as new students arrive. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish Chinese Arabic English 65% Chinese Arabic English Spanish 8% 8% 22% 65% Chinese Arabic English 8% 8% 22% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Formal Face-to-Face meetings are part of the student intake process. on-going as per entry to NYC schools. Parents are sent letters in their native language informing them of Dual Language/ESL workshops conducted by DELLS. Parent Orientation (Registration and Selection), Letters from Administrators/Coordinators regarding New York State testing dates (ELA: 3/28-3/30 2018, Math 5/2-5/4 2018, NYSESLAT: April 11-12, 2018 Speaking, May 9-11, 2018 NYSESLAT speaking: 4/20-4/21 2087, NYSESLAT Listening, reading and writing: 5/9-5/11, 2018. Grade 8 Science Performance May 26-June 1, 2018, Written Science: June 5, 2018. For 2018, ELA 4/11-2018-19 SCEP-P 95  4/13, Math 5/1-5/3, NYSESLAT speaking 4/19-4/20, NYSESLAT Listening, reading and writing 5/8-5/10, Science Performance 5/23-25, 8th grade Science written June 4. Dictionaries in all languages are distributed to parents as needed. PTA activities which take place every third Thursday of each month as well as SLT meetings. Family Curriculum Night on Sept. 26, 2017, family science night in March 2018. Leader in me symposium on November 4, 2016, School Fairs, Standards and Performance (Report Cards), Special Ed and related Success documents, Nurse's office (health related). All after-school activity (SES services, clubs, sports) information, Hand-outs at parent workshops, Incoming 6th grade Parent Orientation information are also translated. They will all be disseminated accordingly. For larger meetings such as graduation (June 20, 2017), Honor Roll and other celebrations we have transmitters and receivers for use by our outside contracted translators. n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Parent Orientation For 2017-2018 school year: SLC’s 11/30/17, 3/7/18 and chancellor 2018-19 SCEP-P 96 Through the use of staff who are native language speakers of Spanish, Arabic, and Chinese. Through the use of telephone translation unit and the use of translators from contracted vendors. On-going based on entry to NYC schools.  mandated 5/9/2018. Ongoing parent conferences will be held in March and May as per DOE mandates. Information from intake forms (HILS), etc) indicated Language preference. Parent workshops are conducted within 5 days of entrance into a NYC school. These will take place throughout the year depending upon date of entrance. Also, translations are provided for IEP meetings. Guidance Counselor meetings and calls with 8th grade parents regarding H.S. Articulation (Oct. 7, 2016). Also, all staff utilize google translate and language line and weekly calls to parents by teachers. Pupil path workshops March 2, March 15 and March 22, 2017, Family nutrition night March 23, 2017, translation for quality review parent representative on Feb. 2, 2017. Saturday Parent Child Cooking class: April 29, 29, May 6, 13, 20, 27, 2017. As per Part 154, we have elected to have our language proficiency team meet with parents of ELLS to discuss their progress including their child's language development, English language proficiency assessment results and language development needs across all content areas as well as ENL. These will be held every second Tuesday from December through January and again in March prior to our testing period. Documents will be translated in a timely fashion by using outside vendor the Legal Interpreting Services, Translation and Interpretation Unit as well as staff translations. n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 2018-19 SCEP-P 97  Automated messaging System that goes out with message in multiple languages. Pupil Path that is translatable into multiple languages. Documents translated by staff proficient in Spanish, Arabic, and Chinese. School website and mobile app can be switched to language of choice by user. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. On-going from the Translation and Interpretation Unit will provide periodic training to parent coordinators and other key school-based personnel on the language access requirements contained in this regulation and on resources available to support these requirements. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We will provide translations of documents in regard to critical information about their child's needs/education to include: registration forms, program selection forms, (ESL, Bilingual, Special Ed, General Ed), conduct sheets, health and safety issues/plans. This will be done by phone, in person, and with the use of interpretation services. Welcome Poster is displayed in our main office, also Posters where parents can obtain instruction on where to locate interpretation services as well as multi-language signage. Parent's Bill of Rights is distributed at parent workshop, displayed on parent coordinator resource table during Parent Teacher Conferences and available during PTA meetings. Parents are able to identify their language using the Guide to Language Access at entering the main office. Safety Agents are provided with the Language ID Guide and the over-the-phone card. We also provide parents with a parent version of the student planners/agendas we distribute in English and Spanish. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will use parent surveys during the Parent Teacher Conferences. Parents will express their concerns on quality and availability of services during PTA/SLT monthly meetings. A consistent focus group of parents that represent the languages that are spoken in our school gather monthly with the parent coordinator to discuss scope and sequence of professional development, resources to support student learning, translation of information and community resources. The parent coordinator tracks family concerns and complaints in regard to notifications from our school. This feedback will provide us with information so that we can ensure that parents can be active agents of their children's education. 2018-19 SCEP-P 98 
