 23K137 School Name: P.S./I.S. 137 RACHEL JEAN MITCHELL Principal: ROSE SUZETTE   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information PS/IS 137 Rachel Jean Mitchell School 23k137 332300010137 Pre K – Grade 8 School Number (DBN): 121 Saratoga Avenue, Brooklyn , New York 11233 (718) 453 – 2926 Phone Number: (718) 453 - 5363 Fax: Suzette Rose Srose8@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 23 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Suzette Rose Rena Shepard Antoine Reels Darcia Millard Janice Johns YewandeAdesina N/A District Information Dr. MiatheresaPate Superintendent: 1784 Park Place. mpate@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 240 – 3677 Phone Number: (718)385- 3768 Fax: FSC: 23 Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: Bernadette Fitzgerald   131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn New York 11201 Executive Director’s Office Address: Bfitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 935 - 3954 Phone Number: Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Suzette Rose Rena Shepard Antoine Reels Joan Parker Janice Johns Janice Johns Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent   Latoya Outlaw KneciaAndall Julia Springer DarciaMillard Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our Mission Section 4: CEP Overview The mission of The Rachel Jean Mitchell School, PS/IS 137 is to create a community of lifelong learners joined in the pursuit of excellence. It is our common goal to promote rigorous high quality instruction this is aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards and addresses individual student’s needs. We strive to “develop the total child, intellectually, socially and emotionally” to enable our students to be prepared for high school, college, career and the   challenges of life. We are sensitive to the needs of our staff, students and their families. So we work diligently at maintaining an environment that is welcoming, safe and respectful for all. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Below are a number of programs that PS/IS 137 offer within the school, as well as with partnerships with various organizations and corporations. These programs help to build our school community and support the needs of our children academically and socially. Our Robinhood Library is consistently adding new titles to our extensive collection of books. Reading is a focus for our continuing initiative to increase academic vocabulary and comprehension. We have been awarded a grant to have a garden program in our school and have school wide involvement. We would like to continue to educate students about eating healthy by planting and harvesting vegetables from our own school garden. We also received a compost grant that aides in the sharing the importance of recycling and reusing products with the entire school community. Additionally, our sustainability coordinator has held professional development with the school community in order to strengthen the recycling initiative across the entire school-wide community. We have been awarded a CASA grant again this year to continue to infuse the Arts to enhance and support academic achievement. This year we are supporting the dance and music program by offering Caribbean Dance and African Drumming in after school enrichment through the arts. Students will work in both programs toward a culminating performance. Each school year, during the month our May our school-wide Science Fair occurs. During this time our students engage in scientific inquiry by choosing a research topic of choice. Students as individuals and groups formulate hypothesis and prove or disprove their questions using experimentation. Students develop hands-on projects for observation and testing. The entire school community is transformed into a laboratory to showcase students’ talents. Technology integration into the learning experience through SMARTBOARDS in every classrooms and our Apple Mac Computer Lab are highlights of our school community. We have 120 laptops that are distributed through 4 laptop carts on each floor. There are also 30 I-Pads used for research and interactive computer assignments. These tools enable our students to be afforded with opportunities to prepare for college and career readiness aligned to the Common Core Standards. The collaboration with our DYCD, New York Edge has provided our students with experiences aligned to STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics) including social and emotional supports. All students in grades 1 – 8 are provided with After-School opportunities the focus on interventions that aide in closing the achievement gap for our lowest 3 rd population, including or ELL and SWD. All students that participate in our after-school programs are also able to participate in the school’s recreation program. This program offers our students with the option to choose to participate in the following clubs on Fridays: ● Dance – Ballet/ Caribbean ● Music ● Art 0  ● Video Games ● Board Games ● Student Government ● News Paper ● Drumming Every school year in June our students participate in an Anti-bully Student Appreciation Carnival. The purpose of this event is to revisit our Non-negotiable, celebrate the reduction of bullying within our school community while providing social and emotional supports. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Some of our Special Student Populations are 3K for All, SWD's, and ELL's. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which our school has made the most progress over the past year is improving both progress and performance through the implementation of “Rigorous Instruction” and “Collaborative Teaching.” The school’s key area of focus for the 2018 – 2019 school year will be fostering questioning and discussion techniques in the classroom to increase rigor. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 23K137 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 303 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 63 58 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 35 34 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 93.0% % Attendance Rate 88.4% % Reduced Lunch 4.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 3.6% 19.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.19 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 35.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 80% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YSH N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 11 11 88.5% 4.3% 28.1% 74.9% 0.0% 4.3% 2 40% 7.9 22.7% 57% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The goals that we've focused on this past school year have been informed by the following:  PPO’s (Principal Performance Observation),  Self-evaluation as a staff  Framework for Great Schools  Learning Environment Survey  School Quality Guide/ Quality Snapshot  Danielson Framework for Teaching  Data captured from Advance According to the 2014 – 2015 School Quality Review our school needs to improve in the area of Curriculum Development 1.1. Whereas our school school aligns instruction according to the common core standards using researched based resource, the implementation of curriculum maps and units plans to provide evidence as to how our schools curriculum is being refined to address current student needs is essential. In addition to the quality review, the 2017 state math exam scores indicated a gain in student proficiency from 13% to 16% as compared to the 2016 state test. Finally, after analyzing the Danielson Framework for Teaching Results, the school has identified questioning and discussion techniques as a focus area during the 2018-2019 school year. 3  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, improved rigor in math classrooms and explicit writing instruction will lead to an increase in students' proficiency levels, as measured by a 3% increase in students scoring at level 3 and 4 on NYS math and NYS ELA assessments. In addition, a special focus will be placed on moving Level 1's and 2's for SWD's and ELL's 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? To ensure pedagogy is in alignment with the Common Core curriculum, administrators will complete short, frequent classroom visits for informal observations and formal observations. The observations will evaluate professional practices; provide meaningful feedback and next steps to develop instruction linked to professional development. Teachers and Cluster Teachers of 3K – 8 Beginning September 2018 and ending June 2019 Principal Assistant Principal Teacher Leaders To ensure curriculum is rigorous and is aligned across all grades, the school has made the decision to implement Go Math from Kindergarten to grade 8. Professional development will be provided to teachers on an ongoing basis throughout the year to support the transition to the new curriculum. Teachers and Cluster Teachers of 3K – 8 Beginning September 2018 and ending June 2019 Administrators will complete short, frequent classroom visits for informal observations and formal observations. The observations will evaluate professional practices; provide meaningful feedback and next steps to develop instruction linked to professional development. Teachers and Cluster Teachers of 3K – 8 Teacher teams in grades K-8 will develop a schoolwide writing rubric to be used across content areas (ELA, Science, Social Studies). Students will become familiar with this rubric, which is aligned to the NYS 4-point writing rubric. As a result, teachers will provide high-quality, rubric based feedback. ELA, S.S. and Science Teachers of K – 8 Beginning September 2018 and ending June 2019 Beginning September 2018 and ending June 2019 Principal Assistant Principal Teacher Leaders Go Math Trainers Principal Assistant Principal Teacher Team Leaders Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will hold monthly "Sip Tea" events with the principal and parents, engage parents at PTA events regarding the standards, and teachers will share standards-based goals with parents during parent teacher conferences. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 5  - Outside Consultants - Parent Workshops - UFT Contractual Time for Parent Engagement - Parent Coordinator - PTA Workshops - Per Diem Coverage - Per Session Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By June 2019, we will see a 2% increase in students scoring at or above proficiency (Levels 3 & 4) on CCLS-aligned interim assessments in Math. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) iReady interim assessment in Math Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? OORS superintendent's suspensions decreased from 16 to 9 from 2015-16 to 2016-17. There was a slight increase in lesser SOHO infractions (principal's suspensions / teacher removals), indicating more efficient use of progressive discipline. Danielson classroom observation data has revealed a relative strength in Domain 2 - The Classroom Environment. As a result, we noticed a 1% uptick in the 2017 survey question about feeling safe inside of the classroom. Components 3b and 3c, however, have been identified as an area of focus for the 2017-2018 school year. These domains relate to promoting a challenging environment for all students in the classroom. ELA proficiency levels increased in 2017-2018 by 9% in grades 3-8 on the state test. Math proficiency in the same time period increased by 3.4% for grades 3-8. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students in all grades will have participated in various school-wide initiatives aimed at making them feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. This will result in a 3% increase in students, teachers, and parents responding "agree" or "strongly agree" to questions on the school survey in the supportive environment section. 7  8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional development in developing discussion techniques and student engagement will be presented by Teachers, Administrators, Professional Developers, and model teachers at other schools to classroom teachers. All Teachers Beginning September 2018 and Ending June 2019 Single Shepard will provide overall and targeted support to middle school students, as well as engaging with families of middle school students in an effort to support students inside and outside of the building. Students in high-need subgroups (ELLs, SWDs, STH) have been identified as targeted students. A comprehensive positive behavior incentive system will be implemented regularly by school staff towards students. Incentives are given for embodying the school's core values in the classroom and around the school. Grades 6-8 Students Beginning September 2018 and Ending June 2019 All Students Beginning September 2018 and Ending June 2019 Teachers of early childhood students will attend professional learning for addressing socio-emotional learning needs. Teachers will then turnkey information to the rest of the staff, who will implement strategies in the school building. All Students Beginning September 2018 and Ending June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Classroom Teachers Principal Assistant Principal Model Teacher Teacher Leaders Single Shepard Principal Assistant Principal Principal Assistant Principal Guidance Support Staff Classroom Teachers Early Childhood Teachers All Staff How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. 9  At meet the teacher night in September, our "STRIVE Buck" PBIS will be introduced to parents. This system supports not only positive behaviors, but academics as well. In the month of October, the entire school will engage in anti-bullying month. This will include a "Sip Tea" event where bullying will be addressed. In addition, a student-led assembly will take place where students act out scenarios of how to be an upstander. For middle school students in particular, the school has partnered with Community Affairs officers of the 73rd precinct to hold a "Cyber Safety and Social Media" workshop for students and families in November. Parents and families will also be given the opportunity to sound off during the "Sip Tea" event in February as to how the school has been doing with their supportive environment initiatives. Finally, the SLT addresses school culture and environment on a monthly basis. The group is tasked with monitoring the progress being made towards achieving this goal. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Outside Consultants - Parent Workshops - UFT Contractual Time for Parent Engagement - Parent Coordinator - PTA Workshops - Per Diem Coverage - Per Session - Donations for PBIS Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A Title III, Part A PTA Funded X In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will see a 5% decrease in student incidents and suspensions compared to February, 2017 data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 0  OORS incident and SOHO suspension data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. PPO results from the 2016-2017 school year have identified cultivating teacher teams as an area for development for the upcoming school year. Student proficiency and growth results in math and ELA, based on scores from the 2016 state exams, varied greatly between teachers on the same grade bands. Survey results based on the 2016-2017 Learning Environment survey slow a slight decline in questions surrounding collaborative teachers. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will have participated in increased opportunities for professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement, including engaging in "Showcase Visits" throughout the 2018-2019 school year. To create a more authentic and organic process, teachers will conduct Monday professional development sessions as often as possible, and will spearhead teacher team meetings. All sessions will focus on improving practices to bolster student achievement. This goal will be measured in a 3% increase in "agree" or "strongly agree" responses from staff on the 2018-2019 school survey in the section measuring collaborative teachers. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). A Teacher Team Meeting has been built into classroom teacher's teaching periods for the teachers in grades 3-5. Teachers modeling best practices will teach lessons in grades 3-5 for general education students as well as students in high-need subgroups. Push-in teachers and all classroom teachers will then meet once a week to discuss student learning and plan for future lessons. Teachers of Students in Grades 3-5 Beginning September 2018 and Ending June 2019 Administration Math Cluster Teacher IEP Teacher Common Prep time has been built into schedule to foster collaboration between grade level teachers. Teachers will meet to discuss student learning data, plan high-leverage lessons, and strategies to promote teacher-parent collaborations to improve student achievement. All ClassroomTeachers and Paraprofessionals Some Tuesday afternoons will be utilized to foster regular teacher team meetings. All Classroom Teachers In coordination with the Professional Development Committee, teachers will be designated to lead professional learning sessions to showcase best practices. All Classroom Teachers and Paraprofessionals Grades 3-5 Classroom Teachers and Paraprofessionals Administration Grade-Level Teacher Teams Administration Grade-Level Teacher Teams Administration PD Committee Members Beginning September 2018 and Ending June 2019 Beginning September 2018 and Ending June 2019 Beginning September 2018 and Ending June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents are engaged in this process during the monthly SLT meetings where this CEP is addressed. 3  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Outside Consultants - Math Cluster Teacher to Provide Schedule Time for Teacher Team Meeting - UFT Contractual Time for Professional Learning - Per Diem Coverage for Outside PL Opportunities - Per Session Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 75% or more of teachers and paraprofessionals will either "agree" or "strongly agree" that increased opportunities for professional learning at the school (as compared to the prior school year) have been provided within a culture of continuous improvement. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Schoolwide survey form given to all teachers and paraprofessionals Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Statistics show that student attendance at PS/IS 137 has been hovering in the 88-89% range over the past four school years, which is well below the 50th percentile when compared to attendance rates at other city schools. According to the latest School Quality Snapshot, 43% of the student body has fallen into the chronically absent category. Enrollment numbers have been holding steadily at just above 290 students on average over the past four years, but there is capacity to increase enrollment in classrooms at the school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of a comprehensive initiative involving all students, staff, and school leaders, we will see a 1.5% increase in daily student attendance, as measured by ATS attendance reports. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Yearly Attendance Raffle with Information Board for Parents/Guardians All Students and Families Chronically Absent Students All Students and Families Meetings, goal setting and attendance incentives for chronically absent students Monthly Attendance Incentives 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Beginning September 2018 and Ending June 2019 Beginning September 2018 and Ending June 2019 Beginning September 2018 and Ending June 2019 Principal Assistant Principal Attendance Team Family Worker Principal Assistant Principal Attendance Team How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. A new attendance board is being planned to publicly publish daily student attendance rates. On this board, attendance goals will be displayed, as well as the incentives tied to this goal. The board is strategically positioned by the security desk so that parents and family members can view the progress. SLT leadership is also being given monthly attendance updates to progress monitor the attendance goals. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Attendance Team (Family Worker, Attendance Teacher, School Aide, Administration, Parent Volunteer, SSA) - Schedule Adjustments to Facilitate Monthly Incentives 6  - Donated Money to Provide Incentives Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A Title III, Part A PTA Funded X In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, as a result of a comprehensive initiative involving all students, staff, and school leaders, we will see the daily student attendance rate at or above 90.5%, as measured by ATS attendance reports. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ATS attendance reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. There is an increasing need to improve community and family engagement for our school community as depicted by the 2017-2018 Learning Environment Survey. Although the school regularly communicates and provides information to families, we must provide parents and families with more opportunities to voice their ideas and involve themselves in our school community. We must also use various methods of communication (e.g. email, school website, newsletter, meetings, and social media) to inform and engage our families in the school community. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will develop a more collaborative partnership with families and community organizations, as measured by a 5% increase in parent participation as measured by attendance records. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The school’s Parent Coordinator will provide monthly workshops for parents based on a parent survey and needs assessments. Parents The parent coordinator will collaborate with the PTA and plan monthly meetings to address the needs of our parents. Parents will be encouraged to complete feedback forms after attending the monthly meetings, as well as complete surveys, so that the improvement of community and family engagement can be examined. Parent volunteers will be recruited and trained so that parents can share their talents to better the school community. Families Guardians Care Providers Parents Families Guardians Care Providers Parents Families Guardians Care Providers Parents Families Guardians Care Providers Beginning September 2018 and Ending June 2019 Parent Coordinator PAC/PTA Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator PAC/PTA Administration Beginning September 2018 and Ending June 2019 Beginning September 2018 and Ending June 2019 Beginning September 2018 and Ending June 2019 Parent Coordinator PAC/PTA Administration Teachers Parent Coordinator PAC/PTA Administration Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 9  If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. -73rd Precinct -NY Edge (College Access Parent Workshops) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Title I Parent Funding - Parent Workshops - UFT Contractual Time for Parent Engagement - Parent Coordinator - PTA Workshops - Fundraising by PTA - Per Session Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA Title II, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the school will develop a more collaborative partnership with families and community organizations, as measured by a 3% increase in parent participation as measured by attendance records. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance records of parent engagement nights, workshops, and PTA meetings as compared to the 2017-2018 school year. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) I ready Diagnostic Assessment ELA ( K – 8) Fontas Pinnell Performance Series Benchmark Assessment Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Grades K-2 Words Their Way, Reading Street Decodable Books Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group instruction, targeted students for intervention based on performance data reports Early Childhood RTI- Grades 1 and 2 – Reading Street Intervention Kit When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) After School All grades- 2 hours, Wednesday and Thursday 2:40 PM – 4:50 PM Performance on ELA State Assessment Grade 3-8 -I Ready and Ready materials, Buckle Down Reading Teacher Screening Tools CCLS Beginning / Mid Assessments Formal and Informal Assessments Lowest 3 rd performing students At Risk Students I ready Diagnostic Assessment Math ( K – 8) Fontas Pinnell Mathematics Grades 7,8- Writing skills Grades K-5 Go Math CCLS, My Math K - 5 Small group instruction, targeted students for intervention based on data reports Glencoe Math 6-8 , CPM3 Math 6 - 8 After school All grades 2 hours, Wednesday and Thursday 2:40 PM – 4:50 PM 1  Science Performance Series Benchmark Assessment Beginning / Mid Assessments Formal and Informal Assessments Performance on Math State Assessment Teacher Screening Tools Lowest 3 rd performing students At Risk Students Beginning / Mid Assessments Formal and Informal Assessments Performance Series Benchmark Assessment Beginning / Mid Assessments Formal and Informal Assessments Grades 3-8 -I Ready, Ready, Solve It Math, Strategies for Math Success- Problem Solving, additional help for grades 3-8- preparation for New York State exams and Algebra1 Regents Small group instruction, targeted student based on performance data through summative and formative data After School 50 minutes Wednesday and Thursday, lab time during school day Grade 4- Science test preparation and support/ lab instruction Grade 8 – additional help and preparation for NYS Science Test, Exit Project and Living Environment Regents exam Teacher Screening Tools Lowest 3 rd performing students Social Studies At Risk Students Benchmark Assessment Grade 8-research support for students Students completing 8 th grade requirements for graduation whom After school and during school 2 At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Teacher Screening Tools completing exit projects need additional help and support designated library research time ● ERSSA counseling for targeted at risk students One to one, small group, whole class, teacher professional development During school hours, after school, before school Lowest 3 rd performing students At Risk Students - Parent Meets with PPTand Requests Services -Identified by Guidance Counselor/Single Shepard/ SBST ● Peer Pressure and Bullying conferencing and prevention counseling -Identified by Teacher Teams ● Individual counseling ● Evaluation of referred ● at –risk students ● Parent conferencing and referrals for outside CBO counseling services ● Conflict resolution ● Articulation-Middle School/High School ● College and Career Readiness ● Child Abuse Prevention /Intervention 3  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 41 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. The school has a social worker dedicated solely to servicing students in temporary housing. The social worker performs the following tasks: -Advocates for STH families -Makes appropriate referrals for a multitude of services -Performs crisis interventions -Monitors attendance -Encourages academic success by pushing into classrooms -Maintain contact with OPT when necessary to ensure transportation is in place Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 4  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 5  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Our highly qualified staff is led by team grade leaders. Their role is to share ideas and foster collaboration on classroom practices. Teachers participate in seminars and conferences to update their knowledge of current pedagogical practices. Outside training and retreats are provided to expand on content based knowledge and discuss school improvement strategies. Increasing capacity within the building expands teacher leadership in the school community. Communication between administrators and staff is fostered by an open door policy. These initiatives combine with up to date curriculum, technology and resources to create an environment that supports highly qualified educators. For recruitment purposes, newly hired teachers go through the process of applying for the vacancy position through Open Market. The administrative team reviews the applicant's resume to ensure that potential candidate possess the required certification for the vacancy 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Teacher self-assessments on selected components of a research- based rubric by Charlotte Danielson. Individual professional development plans for each teacher based on Charlotte Danielson Teaching Framework with identified next steps after each formal, informal observation or daily snapshot.  Professional development will include the use of online technology resources to gather data and assess student progress.  Use Pearsonsuccess .net to target student assignments based on multiple forms of data .  Workshops that train teachers to increase inquiry in the classroom and facilitate student centered learning.  Share best practices for differentiating instruction . Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 6  N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Plans for the transition of early childhood into pre-school are: ● Skills Strand and Listening and Learning Strand for grades K-2, Reading Street for Grades 3-5, and Prentice Hall ELA for grades 6-8 ● Ready New York English Language Arts Instruction for K-8 ● Go Math used for grades K-8 ● New York City Science for Pre K - 5 Passport Social Studies Grades K-8  Parent involvement activities including workshops to facilitate parent engagement in homework and questioning strategies .  Expectation package outlining classroom goals for the school year.  Meetings held monthly across grade levels to share expectations for each grade level  Share data of struggling students 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers participate in meetings to gather and discuss the affective assessments for school use of the measures of student progress (MOSL) learning committee. MOSL committee members discuss effective tools for assessing student progress in ELA and Math.. After assessments , MOSL committee review students data and evaluates quality of assessment. 7  Th professional development committee reviews student data and makes decisions for professional development workshops that closely correlate to student performance and needed topics to help teachers build capacity . Teacher may select form different workshops which will suit their students and professional needs. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 240,227.00 101,677.00 0 0 1,903,825.00 Column A Verify with an (X) X X X Column B Section Reference(s) 5A 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages: 8   Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 9  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS/IS 137, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS/IS 137 Rachel Jean Mitchell will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 0  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 1  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● Providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS/IS 137, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 3  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 4  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 5  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● Always try my best to learn. 6  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 23 School Name Rachel Jean Mitchell Borough Brooklyn School Number 137 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Suzette Rose Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Linda Sedda Teacher/Subject Area Diedra Williams Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider Ekene Seymour Superintendent Mauriciere De Govia Assistant Principal Michael Giedgowd Coach type here School Counselor Janette Gutierrez Parent Antoine Reels Parent Coordinator Jan Potter Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 297 7 Total number of ELLs 10 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 3.37%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 1. The assessment tools used to assess early literacy skill differ in early childhood , elementary and middle school. We use Fountas and Pinnell in Grades K-2 to assess literacy skills. Grades three through eight are given a benchmark ELA diagnostic to determine literacy skills. During ENL , we use Imagine Learning software which does a comprehensive literacy skills analysis with data. The data is organized by literacy skill and progress made to date. This data enables both the teacher and the ENL teacher to target areas of need and support the student progress toward English proficiency. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 8  Paste response to question here: 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] 5. Our schools analyses multiple data sources to determine the best strategies for RTI for students who are struggling and or have IEP ‘s and are ELL’s. In most cases because of our small population of ELL’s , Tier I intervention with additional differentiated resources within the classroom help students progress to reach grade level standards in English Language proficiency. There are always variables depending upon individual students language proficiency, disabilities/IEP status, and academic performance which determine the individualized RTI needs for each student. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. 2. The data from the NYSELAT and the NYSITELL show progress based on the modalities, Listening , Speaking , Reading and Writing. Students entering with no English or limited English make progress in Listening and Speaking before Reading and Writing. Students will more than two years of ENL support begin to make significant progress in Reading. Writing is the last modality that students reach proficiency. The NYSITELL gives a baseline of English proficiency , then the mid-year benchmark assessment gives data to monitor progress in the four modalities and targeted areas of focus to improve proficiency level. The NYSELAT gives both quantitative and qualitative data to assess the yearly progress of all ENL students 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. There are various proficiency levels not directed solely by grade level. All ENL students are taught by a fully certified ESL teacher and are assisted with the ENL integration using content area by classroom teachers from Kindergarten to the eighth grade. All students considered Commanding/proficient continue to receive support for two years though integrated ENL and content area instruction. . Entering / Emerging students receive the mandated 360 minutes per week with the support of classroom teacher for ENL integration and content area instruction. Students who are SIFE are interviewed and given informal assessments in the form of reading and/or writing with grade appropriate teacher or interview with student in native language. The students with an IEP, students designated “at risk”, “referred for multidisciplinary evaluation, and or finally, “not met the performance standards in reading and/or writing” or for holdovers are targeted to receive additional services including AIS after school programs, Saturday Academy and individual support as needed. The mode of instruction is through pull-out and push –in. Instruction is differentiated and groups are heterogeneous. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 9  2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Part 154 dictates units of study for English as a New Language. Entering /Emerging require 360 minutes of English Language study. Entering requires 180 minutes ENL stand alone and 180 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA . Emerging has flexibility of 90 minutes ENL stand alone and 90 minute integrated ENL in content areas with 180 minutes Integrated ENL/ELA . Transitioning requires 180 minutes in integrated ENL/ELA with the flexibility of 90 minute block for Integrated ENL/ Content area instruction. Expanding is defined by 180 minutes of Integrated ENL /Content area instruction. Commanding which requires additional two year ENL support has flexibility in Integrated ENL/Content or another approved support program and is 90 minutes. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content is delivered through additional resources in specific content areas by ENL teacher with support from classroom teachers. Resources such as native language instructional materials are also used when available in student’s native language. Reading content is given through content area teachers in middle schools and classroom teachers using differentiated instruction with resources available through school curriculum both through interactive technology and project based learning. Phonics support through ENL instruction and comprehension strategies are practiced within ENL pull out sessions. Dictionaries in native language are provide to help students with translation during classroom sessions. Interactive software program Imagine Learning is used to transition from native language to English as an intervention in the classroom . Imagine Learning is used to increase academic vocabulary and reading skills in the ENL classroom. English language learners workbooks are used in both middle school and for elementary students to differentiate instruction in the classroom environment. Imagine Learning and I-Ready are used as a diagnostic tool to target specific skills in English language acquisition. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? N/A 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Students as newcomers are supported by communicating in their native language if possible and using Imagine Learning software, students’ textbooks in native language and dictionaries are used to assist in differentiating instruction in the classroom ENL teacher as push in/ pull out assists in student activities. Students are supported by peer tutors who are former ELL’s and are proficient in the native language. Activities are adapted to students’ proficiency/grade level with English language phonics and fundamentals of English used to support language development. Students participate in afterschool recreation and academic activities. Developing students are supported by additional resources including interactive software and diagnostic programs that monitor progress. Curriculum materials are differentiated within program structure to target ELL’s in the Elementary program. There are workbooks for ELL’s in the middle school curriculum which support language development. Students receive differentiated instruction by classroom teacher and ENL teacher which are aligned with Common Core Learning Standards. ENL teacher has resources to support content area instruction and facilitate language proficiency. 0  Students are long term ELL’s for various reasons and for this are targeted for individualized evaluation to reveal reasons for delayed language acquisition. Many students have additional disabilities and have an IEP which gives teachers goals and targeted areas of needed support. The classroom teachers and ENL teacher along with the School Support team will conference to assess the students’ learning style and abilities and tailor language based activities which address support needed to achieve proficiency. Former ELL’s are given enrichment activities based on academic performance from assessments both informal and formal. Differentiation is based on continued levels of support in targeted areas of ELA, Math, and other content areas Although proficient these students like native language students need support in critical thinking, reading comprehension and writing. Additional support is through afterschool academics differentiation within classroom, interactive software and resources provided through school curriculum. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Students are provided with additional activities and resources to address areas of needed support in both language acquisition and ELA . Students with Disabilities have additional support when mainstreamed within a classroom with students who speak the native language of the student and are proficient in English to offer maximum tutoring and aid for student. Pull –out by ENL teacher gives individualized instruction in a small setting to maximize progress. Students participate in interactive software programs and afterschool academic and recreational programs to provide different avenues of language acquisition. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Students who are ELL’s with disabilities are mainstream during ELA and content area instruction depending on the level of proficiency, Students have more opportunities to progress toward IEP goals and it is the least restrictive environment Students experience a more diverse learning environment and are able to make greater progress 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. We have a small population of ENL students and they are included in our school wide intervention programs. The programs are small group instruction and many monolingual students have many of the same reading and comprehension skills needs as our ELL’s. In the small group setting students receive individualized support and are monitored on their progress by additional homework, reading and writing practice. Our instruction is in English in all of our classroom instruction. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We have no new programs planned for the coming year. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? There are no prograsm at the present time to be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All Ell's are afforded equal access to all school programs whether after school or during school hours. Our Ell's participate in our regular after school programs and are all heterogenious . 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Our school uses I -Ready instructional materials and diagnostic interactive program. In addition we have the use of Smartboards in the ENL classroom as well as all classrooms to differentiate and address all learning styles. We have Imagine learning which targets ELL's native language to start and gradually transitions students to English with adaptive activites and interactive programing . 1  13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Our ENL program supports the students with textbooks in the native language when avaiable . The ENL teacher supports students with dictionaries and speaks in Spanish to those students who have difficulty understanding and communicating in English. Uses translation software if unable to communicate effectively in native language. Parents are contacted in native language for necessary communication about students progress or needs . 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Services are scheduled by principal and follow the Part 154 guideleines for ENL. Students are group by age and proficiency level in no more than two contiguous grade levels . Push in-and Pull out are services provided. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our school uses I -Ready instructional materials and diagnostic interactive program. In addition we have the use of Smartboards in the ENL classroom as well as all classrooms to differentiate and address all learning styles. We have Imagine learning which targets ELL's native language to start and gradually transitions students to English with adaptive activites and interactive programing . 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). The ENL teacher greets and assists students and parents to help acclimate to school's environment . The Guidance Counselor advises and meets with parents and students do address any needs and help necessary to transition gradually to a new country and school environment. The guidance counselor is fluent in Spanish as well as other support staff. If no translation is possible then the Tranlation and Interpretation phone service is the alternative to assist in welcoming our newcomers. Our newly enrolled students are all welcomed into any schoolwide activities during the school year including assemblies , field trips , and other academic and recreational programs. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We offer to our seventh grade middle school students Italian as a mandated language requirement. There are no language electives. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional development is offered to all staff in order to increase awareness of ELL’s obstacles in second language acquisition and to offer classroom activities that can address more learning styles within the mainstream classrooms. Information is given about the status of the ENL program, including the new classification and guidelines of proficiency levels, schedules, and ELL student information based on needs is addressed to facilitate teacher –student relationships. Lesson plan ideas are shared to 2  facilitate learning in the regular classroom by new ELL’s. Administrators, elementary level teachers, content area teachers, middle school specialized subject teachers, and all student support personnel participate in addressing the needs of ELL’s. Teacher teams meet to contribute and participate in ongoing planning sessions to differentiate instruction and examine data to meet the needs of ELL’s in the regular classroom setting as well as during pull out sessions with the ENL teacher. Collaboration with classroom teachers to understand the needs of the ELLs within the mainstream classroom is ongoing and will lead to ELL’s increased academic performance and language proficiency. Our professional development targets the ELL components and activities within these programs in the Common Core Aligned reading program geared to language comprehension and fluency. Interim assessments given by the ENL teacher and teachers along with meetings with classroom teachers help develop differentiated instruction and collaboration for student progress. Teachers have teacher team meetings geared to specific grade and curriculum and to share best practices. Our school's focus on depth of knowledge skills and critical thinking strategies will give ELL’s greater ability to reach grade level standards. Integration of content area informational text across grade levels will help students with reading comprehension and increase vocabulary. During professional time conferencing with teachers about student goals enable teachers to better reflect on strategies to enhance academic and English Language progress. Teachers evaluate progress through formative and summative data during professional teacher meetings. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our school is a Pre- kindergarten through grade eight so the transition to middle school is comfortable for the students because they remain in the same environment with the teachers they have been working with over time in the school. All the teachers support students transitioning to high school and career readiness with guidance counselor , parent coordinater , SBST and the ENL teacher to help parents and students acclimate to high school environment. Our professional development follows the guidelines of the ELL Policy 2015-2016. Classroom teachers, administrators, ENL teacher, and other support staff are continuously sharing best practices for ELL’s through professional development , professional activity time, teacher team meeting and individual collaborative meetings to ensure the best language support for our ELL’s . We have aligned our school focus for ongoing professional development to the Common Core Curriculum and critical thinking through integration of content area Tier III, Tier IV vocabulary, and comprehension skills. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The ENL teacher, office personnel, the guidance counselor, classroom teacher, other support staff communicate with parents/guardians of ELL’s is ongoing .Parents of ELL’s are contacted on a regular basis to monitor progress and or concerns of parents. Formal meetings are ongoing as needed during the school year to give updates on assessment data and classroom activities. Support for parents to ensure ELL students make progress is given during meetings and or by other communication. Translation is provided for those parents unable to communicate in English whether verbal or written. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Communication with parents is through PTA meetings, parent workshops, school conferences, individual student/parent meetings (translator provided), and school memos (translation provided). Outreach to parents of new ELL’s through Family Workers to facilitate school-home communication. (Translation provided) Information is communicated to LEP parents through flyers and meeting about English language classes for parents. 3  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. We have a strong arts program in which the ELL's participate . Music , dance and visual art give our ELL's opportunity through hands-on activitiesand experiences to express themselves creatively while they progress in English language proficiency. These experiences in art lead to increased progress both in English language proficiency and academic success. 4 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Rose Suzette, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 5  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Suzette Rose Title Principal Michael Giedgowd Assistant Principal Jan Potter Linda Sedda Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Antoine Reels Parent Deidra Willaims Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Janette Gutierrez School Counselor Mauriciere De Govia Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/27/15 10/27/15 10/27/15 10/27/15 10/27/15 10/27/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 10/27/15 10/27/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 6  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 23 School Name: 137 Superintendent: M. De Govia The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Upon registration, the parent is given the Home Language Identification Survey form in the appropriate language to identify students language needs. Ms. Linda Sedda who is an ESL certified teacher is responsible for the intake process is of new ELL’S. The HLIS is administered and an oral interview is conducted with both students and parents to determine the language of dominance. The interview and the HLIS form are completed with a parent conversation using their native language according to parent needs. The school contacts the DOE translation unit in the event that the school does not have an interpreter available in that specific language. A pedagogue trained on the intake process determines the students Home Language Code based on the assessment givenand inputs information into ATS.Emergency contact information card is suppied to parents in the native language when applicable and parents select the form of school communication Letters of Entitlement are sent to the parents in their native language of students whose NYSITELL scores have deemed them as eligible to participate in an ELL program in their native language and in English. Parents are sent 7  continued entitlement letters as well as non-entitlement based on the results of the NYSESLAT or NYSITELL in their native language and or English. A parent orientation is given to inform parents of the three ELL program choices, Transitional Bilingual, Dual Language, and Freestanding ENL. A video presentation provided by the DOE of New York City is also a resource used for the orientation. it is presented in the available native language. This session is conducted by the ENL teacher with staff assistance. Included members of the orientation are the guidance counselor and parent coordinator. The team assists with translation and interpretation. A copy of the New York City Guide for Parents of ELL’S describing the three programs in the native language is distributed at the orientation. Memo's and school communication is sent home to parents in the translation appropriate for family's needs. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language We have a 3.45 percent population of ELL's in our school which is 10 students. Most parents prefer English however at time we have a small percentage of parents who prefer Spanish and French as a means of communication in both wrtten and oral . When indicated we bring in an interpretor for French . Most of the students are of Hispanic origin and there are several in house persons able to translate both orally and in written documents. We have dictionaries in the library and given to ELL's to help with day to day translation. Texbooks are provided to those students while in the English acquisition process. Parents and students can then understand the curriculum as it progresses without lapse in studies. The small population of ELL's allows for pairing of past ELL's whom are now proficient in English and 8  are bilingual to assist with translation of daily assignments. At parent meetings there is an in house translator for our Spanish speaking parents. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Upon registration, the parent is given the Home Language Identification Survey form in the parents native language when possible to identify student’s language. Ms. Linda Sedda who is an ESL certified teacher is responsible for the intake process is of new ELL’S. The HLIS is administered and an oral interview is conducted with both students and parents to determine the language of dominance. The interview and the HLIS form are completed with a parent conversation using their native language. The school contacts the DOE translation unit in the event that the school does not have an interpreter available in that specific language. The ENL teacher provides the orientation video in the language of preference and the parent is given the DOE form for choice of correspondence from the school. Parent notifications, reports, and explanations are disseminated in understandable and practical way that parents can understand.The DOE website facilitates 9  the acquisition of the appropriate ELL entitlement letters, and related corespondence. Announcements will be given out whenever possible in Spanish, Haitian Creole,French, etc. Translation for parent meetings is also available within our school from our volunteers, family workers, parent coordinator, and staff members. Parents of ELL's will be encouraged to participate on the advisory councils and CEP review panel and or other school-based planning and decision making committees. Meetings should take place before, during or after school the regular school day. Workshops are provided with translation to encourage parents of ELL's to participate in school wide activities.Parents are advised of the Department of Education website as a resource for families as many resources are translated into various languages .One to one meetings are scheduled to inform parents of important dates during the school year, testing , assemblies, holiday vacations, etc. Translation is available for those parents who are LEP in both written and oral communication. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? We have an open door policy at our school and yearly we invite parents to an open house in September . Parents ar also invites to visit our classes as per request and view their child within the classroom. Parents can meet with a teacher every Tuesday for "Let's Talk" sessions after school as well as for our parent -teacher conferences. An in house translator is available by request as is an outside translator during pre- scheduled meetings. 0  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) All parents will be notified as to the availability of translated documents and oral translation through PTA meetings, parent meetings, individual parent conferences. Parents can request translation for student documents written or verbal. Support staff and in house translation is available to facilitate communication of important documentation and or events for LEP parents within school community . Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Each year there is a school survey that all parents are encouraged to complete. We have an open door policy for all parents to meet with administration, teachers, parent coordinator, and support staff to express concerns and give us feedback or requests about our school's parents involvement and services.In house translation is available for Spanish language. 1 
