 19K149 School Name: P.S. 149 DANNY KAYE Principal: YVETTE DONALD   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 19K149 Danny Kaye School 331900010149 PreK-5 700 Sutter Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11207 718-688-7620 Phone Number: 718-345-8118 Fax: Yvette Donald Yschoff@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Yvette Donald Stacy Easton Trina Dunn Rhonda Barrett Trina Dun N/A N/A Donna Morancie District Information Geographical District: 19 Dr. Thomas McBryde Jr Superintendent: 557 Pennsylvania Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11207 Superintendent’s Office Address: TMcbryde@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-240-2700 Phone Number: 718-240-2741 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Brooklyn North Bernadette Fitzgerald FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 131 Livingston, Brooklyn, NY 11201 BFitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-3954 Phone Number: 718-935-4314 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Yvette Donald Stacy Easton Trina Dunn Ronda Moore-Barrett Trina Dunn Donna Morancie Kathleen Garaway LisetteAroyo Marjorie Louis *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) SharondaBlair Lathea Thompson Yvonne Banks Wafae Mohamed Member/ Parent Member/ UFT Member/ UFT Member/ UFT Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? PS 149 is committed to creating a school of 21 st Century learners and communicators who Reach Outstanding Achievement and Results (R.O.A.R)! In service of that vision, our mission is to work with rigor, focus and a strong sense of purpose to enable our students to achieve high standards of excellence. Through our instructional guidance, and family service programs, we seek to assist our students to reach their full potential so that they may be better able to function in our increasingly technological society. Public School 149 is a dynamic school with a rich heritage on   which we are building. We hope to use the arts to champion our children's talents, to challenge their energy, to nurture their spirits, to foster their skills and to showcase their accomplishments. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S.149K is a Title I elementary school located in the heart of East New York Brooklyn with about 770 students from Pre-K through grade 5. The school population is comprised of 69% Black, 29% Hispanic, and 2% Asian students. Boys account for 48% of the students enrolled and girls account for 52%. The average attendance rate for the school year 2016 - 2017 was 93%. Our theory of action for gradual and consistent school improvement centers on interactions between our standards-based curriculum, research-based instructional practices and dynamic community. We believe that if we provide all children with rigorous curriculum using the Workshop Model in a safe learning environment, and we strength our professional learning systems, then we will increase academic, social-emotional and pedagogical outcomes for all members of our school community. PS 149 has a large transient population, which poses several challenges for school community. However, our focus on strong instructional and organizational systems, structures and partnerships ensure that our school community addresses the needs of these challenges. In partnership with our Community Based Organization (CBO), PENCIL, Domain Properties, Educational Alchemy and the Brooklyn Children Services' Gary Klinsky program we offer after-school, academic and enrichment programs; art electives; home respite care; Saturday tutoring and service programs; as well as family counseling to our students and guardians. We provide academic intervention after-school programs Monday through Friday, 2:20PM – 6:00PM, and, on Saturdays . In addition to Tier 2 academic supports, our students participate in many enrichment programs such as Architecture for Kids (a STEM program), Spelling Bee (language program), Little Kids Rock Modern Jazz Band (NYU Instrumental Arts Program), Step Up to Man Up (a program that provides college and career skills and strategies to our young boys) , Hope Dance (Modern Dance Group that focuses on multi-step instructions, dance routines and fine motor skills), Yaffa ( Cultural Arts organization focused on drama, dance and drumming), Brienza, Medgar Evers College Pipeline and Accelerated Literacy. Twenty-five percent of our staff have been trained on Theraputic Crisis Intervention Systems (TCIS) with other cohorts of teachers scheduled to attend training over the summer and fall. Our goal is to have 25% of our staff TCIS trained by February 2019; thus increasing the skills, knowledge, and professional judgment of staff in in helping young people learn constructive and adaptive ways to deal with frustration, failure, anger, rejection, hurt, and depression. In spite of our challenges and as a result of our strong systems and structures, PS 149K is a school on the rise! We are excited to note that we have made big improvements this past year. We have worked hard with our struggling students, particularly students with disabilities (SWD) and students in temporary (STH) housing, teachers and parents to make academic improvements. Over the past year, we have increased the work of our professional learning communities by focusing analysis of student work and teacher practice. Teachers, paraprofessionals and teaching assistants collectively focus on reading and writing across their respective grades. Teachers spend common planning time analyzing reading practices and materials. Paraprofessionals and teaching assistants work in collaboration to analyze pedagogical practices and build on feedback. Students sharpened their reading, writing and math skills through an extensive exploration of the visual arts and performance arts (such as band and chorus performances). Parent workshops on mental health, academic and emotional supports have resulted in an increased understanding of student attendance and completion of task. These efforts have resulted in PS 149 making Annual Yearly Progress (AYP) for all student groups, including SWDs and STH. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 0  The student body includes 12% ELLs and 12% SWDs. We have an increasing Middle Eastern ELL population that has never been to school. This population of Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE) has experienced great trauma and face many cultural challenges that make it very difficult to service them. We also have a 38 % students in temporary housing (STH) population. This group comes with many social-emotional, health and academic needs. Of our 38% STH students, 85% of them are SWDs and 40% of them have been to more than 2 schools before coming to us. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our focus on curriculum has resulted in increases in the number of students meeting promotional criteria from June of 2016 to June 2017. In June 2015, 72% of our students met promotional criteria in ELA and 76% in math. In June 2016, 79% of our students met promotional criteria in ELA, and 81% of our students met promotional criteria in Math. And, now in June 2017, we have 82% of our students meeting promotional criteria in ELA, and 85% of our students meeting promotional criteria in math, including using promotional modifications. Our focus for the 2018-2019 school year will focus on small group instruction, specifically guided reading; and, teacher collaboration, specifically using student benchmark assessment data to inform instructional practices. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 19K149 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 681 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 80 78 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 29 16 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 95.0% % Attendance Rate 91.2% % Reduced Lunch 6.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.6% 35.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.1 0% 5% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 31.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 80% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A YSH NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 7 6 89.5% 4.3% 15.0% 59.3% 3.1% 1.0% 4 0% 4.3 29.1% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The 2018 ccls-algined End-of-Year (EOY) Benchmark Assessments (NYS release state exam questions) data indicated that an average of 66% of our students are able to read, 65% are able to write at proficiency and an average of 67% are at proficiency in mathematics. A deeper analysis of the math data surfaced students’ need to strengthen fluency of multiplication and division facts, expand explanation of mathematical thinking, and deconstruct multi-step word problems. Analysis of the ELA data surfaced a need to focus on identifying main idea and making inferences across a variety of genre, as well as understanding key vocabulary in context. A more granular data analysis of the Reading, Writing and Math data is indicated below. Based on the 2018 EOY ccls-aligned Benchmark Reading Assessment ● 55% of the students in Kindergarten are reading on or above grade level ● 66% of the students in First (1) Graders are reading on or above grade level ● 48% of the students in Second (2) Graders are reading on or above grade level ● 58% of the students in Third (3) Graders are reading on or above grade level ● 89% of the students in Fourth (4) Graders are reading on or above grade level ● 82% of the students in Fifth (5) Graders are reading on or above grade level Based on the 2017 EOY ccls-aligned Benchmark Writing Assessment ● 60% of the students in Kindergarten are writing on or above grade level ● 70% of the students in First (1) Graders are writing on or above grade level ● 22% of the students in Second (2) Graders are writing on or above grade level ● 68% of the students in Third (3) Graders are writing on or above grade level ● 86% of the students in Fourth (4) Graders are writing on or above grade level 3  ● 88% of the students in Fifth (5) Graders are writing on or above grade level Based on the 2018 EOY ccls-aligned Benchmark Math Exam ● 67% of the students in Kindergarten on or above grade level ● 64% of the students in First (1) Graders are on or above grade level ● 45% of the students in Second (2) Graders are on or above grade level ● 56% of the students in Third (3) Graders are on or above grade level ● 90% of the students in Fourth (4) Graders are on or above grade level ● 78% of the students in Fifth (5) Graders are on or above grade level Our school has established leadership structures which put an emphasis on the curriculum students are exposed to, in and out of class. For example, a content expert has been identified on each grade level, charged with ensuring that learning tasks support students' needs and engage them cognitively. Teachers meet in grade teas to review exam data. This data analysis is used to modify units of study and selection of instructional materials. However, teachers are not yet consistently analyzing student data for each unit of study to determine necessary modifications. Individual lessons do not yet reflect specific modifications based analyzed student data. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the percentage of students, including ENLs and SWDs, in grades 3 - 5 achieving levels 3 and 4 on the NYS ELA Common Core Exam and the percentage of students, including ENLs and SWDs, in grades K - 2 demonstrating proficiency on the F&P reading assessments and TC Writing Rubric will increase by 10% as a result of implementing a rigorous curriculum aligned to the CCLS. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? July 2018– June 2019 Teachers; Paraprofessionals; School Aides; School Based Support Staff; Students; School Lowest 1/3; STH; Parents Coach, Assistant Principals, Principal, Instructional Leads, BFSC Instructional Support Staff, Consultant Coaches and CBO Partners  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ● PD for teachers CCLS in ELA to deepen their understanding of state wide expectations for students ● Administer baseline Benchmark ELA assessments in October 2018 to determine what students know and can do in relationship to the CCLS expectations ● Teachers will use data from ELA baseline to inform curriculum and instruction ● Teachers will supplement ReadyGen reading lessons with Teacher's College Writing lessons and other instructional resources that expand student thinking ● Teachers will be provided curriculum PD to unpack the TC Reading Units of Study ● Teachers will modify ReadyGen lessons to embed higher DOK level questions and performance tasks ● Teachers will engage students in small group instruction and conferences. ● Administration will use data from ELA baseline to inform targeted after-school and Saturday school instructional groups ● Teachers will engage in 2 Teacher Team structures: one to monitor and revise learning experiences aligned to the CCLS expectations; another cycle will be focused on the development of literacy practices across the school ● Instructional Leads will attend school-based curriculum team PD and turnkey information to other teachers on their grade 5  ● Extended cabinet (Teacher Leader) meetings will focus on analyzing coherency between CCLS aligned tasks across the grades ● PD will focus on Danielson components 1E and 3B and how to support students in using evidence to support a response in ELA. ● Teachers will continue to unpack the CCLS ELA standards ● The data team will gather and share Beginning of Year, Middle of Year and End of Year Running Record data with teachers ● Before and after school programs will provide Tier 1 and Tier 2 support to specific subgroups of students, including students with disabilities, English language learners and students in temporary housing ● Monthly celebrations and parent luncheons/meeting with families and staff highlighting every day literacy strategies ● Academic Intervention Support counseling for students ● Students will be provided small group intervention, under the supervision of a certified teacher and teacher assistant provided by Educational Alchemy ● RazKids ● AfterSchool Academy ● Saturday Academy ● Exam Deconstruction Institutes Reducing Class size and/or push-in/pull-out instruction by teachers, paraprofessionals and staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Over the course of the 2018-2019 school year, parents will be provided a copy of the curriculum on our school's website to view with Examplars of what proficiency looks like for students. We will conduct small group parent workshops during the school-day, after-school and on Saturdays; we will provide parents an opportunity to explore the standards in action through outings and other school events; we will host parent-student learning nights to provide parents an opportunity to experience the curriculum with their students. Parents will also have access to 6  online learning tools that they can use to support their children. Strategies on how to use specific tools and resources to support their children at home. In addition, rubrics and benchmark papers will be provided for parents and students. Workshops, events and in-class learning experiences will be conducted by the administration, school parent coordinator, guidance counselor, teachers, coaches and consultant partners. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will provide per session, per diem, and consultant dollars from August 2018- June 2019 Educational Consultants, Non-Contractual services, Curriculum and Staff Developer, Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, students in grades K - 5 scoring at proficiency (Levels 3 & 4) will increase by 7% as measured by ccls- aligned MOY Benchmark ELA Assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) CCLS-aligned Benchmark ELA assessment will include previously released NYS Common Core exam items for grades 3 - 5 and a collaboratively developed Benchmark Assessments. The Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System will be used for grades K-2. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? While our schoolwide attendance has increased from 92% to 93%, further analysis of our attendance data indicates that our Students in Temporary Housing (STH) population and students in grades K-2, as sub-groups, have, on average, less than 90% attendance rate. Also, our students with disabilities, particularly in lower grades, have a less than 90% attendance rate. For example, about 70% of the students identified for suspensions and teacher removals were students in temporary housing. Connectedly, the parents of our most emotionally fragile students are also experiencing trauma. Several of the parents of the students in temporary housing have health or financial challenges, resulting in appointments to see the doctor or social agencies. Most of our STH families are led by single females with little to no other support. This often means that they do not have anyone to pick up their children or meet their children at the bus stop, after school. Many of them have appointments connected to finding a job, health and housing. If no one is there to assist in picking up the children after school or meeting them at the bus stop, the families often make the decision not to send their children to school. The frequent absences result in missed work and lessons that make it difficult for them to keep up when they are present. Thus, these children frequently misbehave out of frustration and end up with teacher removals, leading to increased frustration. Therefore, our focus this year is on the social-emotional learning needs of students with low attendance. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018, the student and adults' social and emotional development will be further strengthened by engaging in school-wide positive behavioral interventions, resulting in a positive and engaging school culture and learning environment that will increase students' attendance in school from 92.8% to 94.5%, as measured by the Year to Date Attendance Report, teacher's participation in school-wide activities will increase by 10% and a 10% decrease in the number of OORS incident reports. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Coach, Assistant Principals, Principal, Instructional Leads, BFSC Instructional Support Staff, Common Planning Time, Consultant Coaches and Partners; BCS Gary Klinsky; F-status Guidance Counselor  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ● The services of all school personnel including the guidance counselor, Child Study Team, Parent Coordinator and family assistants will be utilized to communicate with parents the importance of attendance. ● Initial implementation of TCIS strategies, a values-based initiative designed to create and maintain a positive school climate and engaging school culture. August 2017 – June 2018 Teachers; Paraprofessionals; School Aides; School Based Support Staff; Students; School Lowest 1/3; STH; Parents ● Use of call/messenger service to alert parents of children’s absences ● Designated United Federation of Teachers’ (UFT) contractual days (Tuesdays) are used for face to face and phone meetings with parents regarding student attendance and related missing work ● Home visits/ community outreach – Parent Volunteers and Family Assistants ● At Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) meetings- recognize parents and families with good and improving attendance ● Monitor chronic absenteeism daily, weekly and monthly; and host community meetings with a “Coffee Hour”. ● Use of Educational Alchemy members to contact parents daily and mentor students with chronic absent/late records ● Working closely with Community Based Organization’s (CBO) and other community agencies to provide support services for parents. ● Asthma ambassador to work closely with the school nurse to monitor students with asthma. 9  ● Weekly incentives/awards to build esteem and attendance of focus group ● Bulletin Board dedicated to monitoring attendance of focus group ● Parent meetings and luncheons ● The Use of Educational Alchemy members to greet and direct students on the staircases in the morning. ● Continue to promote student attendance with incentives such as: Monthly Attendance Celebrations, School spirit T-shirt, weekly and monthly breakfast with families and administration and guidance counselors. ● Classroom and school wide incentives for high attendance rates. ● Reward students who are on the chronic absenteeism list that are showing improvement. ● Provide monthly rewards to students with good attendance ● Monthly grade team letters to parents regarding importance of instructional days within a unit ● Provide additional guidance via youth development team to support students in temporary housing  School-wide teacher and staff celebratory events and activities. ● Provide bi-monthly activities and events for our most fragile families, STH, to incentivize coming to school on a daily basis ● Parent Coordinator and guidance will receive training from the network level to gain additional insights and resources to help in improving attendance. celebratory trips, Mother-Daughter and Father-Son celebrations, family retreats, staff and student community building retreat in order to address the social-emotional needs of students, families and staff. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 0  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will meet with families on a monthly basis to deepen their understanding of the value of student attendance on student outcomes. We will incentivize families and students to come to school and improve attendance through assemblies, trips and other celebrations. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per Diem staff, consultant staff, principal, assistant principal, teachers, parent coordinator, secretary, family worker, school aide, purchased supplies, family trips, family events, clothing, charter buses for trips, luncheons Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we expect the cumulative annual attendance to be 94%, accounting for traditional attendance patterns, to allow us to reach 93.5% at the end of the year; and, a 6% decrease in the number of OORS incident reports. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ATS Period Attendance & cumulative attendance reports; OORS incident reports; School-wide activity sign-in sheets Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. All of our teachers are scheduled for a minimum of two collaborative team meetings a week. Grade leaders lead the learning across the grade, which includes analyzing student academic and behavioral data. Teachers also meet on Mondays and Tuesdays in whole group and grade team professional learning experiences. Review and analysis of observation data indicate that there is consistency of practices across classrooms. However, analysis of 2016-2017 student performance data, NYS exam and NYC performance bundles indicated that a large number of students continue to struggle to meet the expectations of the common core learning standards in math. In particular, students struggled with demonstrating grade level ability to justify or defend their responses in math. Teachers need guidance in unpacking the math standards and expectations so that they understand they are able to strategically integrate math practices that strengthen students understanding of number sense and number functions into unit and lesson plans. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will participate in structured professional learning opportunities, focused on equitable and culturally relevant pedagogical practices, which will result in a 10% increase in the overall average percentage of students scoring at proficiency on the End of Year ccls-aligned Benchmark exam in math. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers, paraprofesssional, school aides and parent volunteers July 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Coordinators, Parent Coordinator, Lead Teachers, Borough Field Office Support Center Literacy Achievement Coaches; Consultant Coaches and Partners  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Provide professional development on teaching strategies that support math concepts. Provide PD on implicit bias and culturally relevant instructional practices. Provide PD on specially designed instructional (SDI) practices. Provide PD, via a consultant, to modify and revise our school's math curriculum to include rigorous performance tasks. Provide professional development on the use of writing to support mathematical reasoning. Provide professional development in developing and using CCLS aligned rubrics for CCLS performance based tasks. Modify and revise our curriculum maps, learning experiences and tasks to ensure more DOK Level 3 and 4 prompts. Align the curriculum to the CCLS scope and sequence and plan and implement common core aligned curriculum and integrate instructional shifts that focus on building strong 3  foundational skills, academic language, promote critical thinking through reading, writing, listening and speaking during math instruction. All teachers will be scheduled for three(3) common planning periods a week. Target grades, such as Grades 1, 2 and 3, will be scheduled for four(4) common planning periods a week. There will be grade leaders assigned to each Teacher Team. Grade leader Teacher Team will focus on increasing discussion, engagement, assessment practices and academic rigor across the school community. Special education teachers will meet in weekly vertical teams to share strategies and practices. Teacher team meetings will focus on developing rigorous math tasks based on released NYS exam questions, and social emotional needs of students. Curriculum lead teams will conduct study groups focused on unpacking CCLS instructional shifts and writing across the curriculum. The AIS and SETSS teachers will provide support to the lowest 1/3rd of students. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 4  Over the course of the 2018-2019 school year, parents will be provided a copy of the curriculum on our school's website to view with math examplars of what proficiency looks like for students. We will conduct small group parent workshops during the school-day, after-school and on Saturdays; we will provide parents an opportunity to explore the standards in action through outings and other school events; we will host parent-student learning nights to provide parents an opportunity to experience the curriculum with their students. Parents will also have access to online learning tools that they can use to support their children. Strategies on how to use specific tools and resources to support their children at home. In addition, rubrics and benchmark papers will be provided for parents and students. Workshops, events and in-class learning experiences will be conducted by the administration, school parent coordinator, guidance counselor, teachers, coaches and consultant partners. Some workshops and sessions will be conducted in the Library, Parent Room, Multi-purpose room, Classroom and at off-site venues, such as cultural sites. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Weekly Common Planning Time, Weekly Professional Development, Weekly Parent Outreach, After-school and Saturday Academies, Professional Development Retreats, Curriculum Development; Social Emotional Growth Strategy and Skills development Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, students scoring at proficiency (Levels 3 & 4) on Math performance tasks will increase by 5% as measured by ccls-aligned Middle-of-the-Year Benchmark math assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Math Performance Tasks including previously released NYS Common Core exam items. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In response to 12% of students at proficiency in ELA and 18% in math, administration has established focused improvement plans in an effort to increase student outcomes. Review of the 2017-2018 teacher observation data indicates that our teachers struggle with engaging students in high level discussions using higher order thinking questions. Teacher observation data indicate that teachers continue to struggle with aspects of the Common Core Learning Standards’ (CCLS) instructional shifts. According to observation data, approximately 50% of teachers need to further strengthen content area knowledge and pedagogy and planning. The focus this year will be on how well teachers align learning tasks and activities to the identified lesson objective in order to engage students and expand thinking. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 60% of teachers will increase their understanding of the instructional shifts in literacy and math as measured by a 1 level movement on the Danielson Framework in Designing Coherent Instruction. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Engage teachers in learning experiences that enables them to: ● Create or modify units and lessons that follow the workshop model and integrate the CCLS instructional shifts ● Strengthen the alignment between the learning experiences for students and the lesson outcomes. ● Strengthen knowledge of content area pedagogy and content via text-based reflection and in-person PD ● Strengthen knowledge of students’ developmental learning needs Engage parents in experiences that allow them to: All parents August 2018 – June 2019 ● Deepen their understanding of the CCLS learning expectations ● Understand appropriate learning behaviors and ways to support them at home ● Learn strategies to strengthen their child’s understanding of the CCLS Teachers are provided with structured learning times for collaborative conversations during common planning meetings. Bi-weekly and monthly content area meetings, along with Grade Leader meetings serve as professional learning opportunities for teachers to analyze gaps in students learning. All teachers September 2018-June 2019 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers, staff and parents July 2018 – June 2019 Coach, Assistant Principals, Principal, Instructional Leads, BFSC Instructional Support Staff, Common Planning Time, Consultant Coach; BCS Gary Klinsky; Parent Coordinator, Teachers, Administration, Support Staff, Guidance Counselor, Coach, BCS Gary Klinsky, Americorp City Year Coach, Assistant Principals, Principal, Instructional Leads, BFSC Instructional Support Staff, Common Planning Time, Consultant Coach; BCS Gary Klinsky; 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 7  The Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, Assistant Principal, Principal and teachers will host monthly meetings, including SLT and PTA meetings, workshops, in-class visits and events, along with a "class mom" to empower parents to take leadership roles Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, Assistant Principal, Principal and teachers will host monthly meetings, including SLT and PTA meetings, workshops, in-class visits and events, along with a "class mom" to empower parents to take leadership roles. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 45% of teachers will have made a 1 level improvement on their Danielson based evaluation in Designing Coherent Instruction. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance Teacher Evaluation Reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The 2018 School Survey report demonstrated a need for the school to offer a wide range of extracurricular activities and services that support and address the social-emotional needs of students and parents. More than 30% of parent indicated that they want to know about the content that their child is learning. Less than 60% of parents noted that they believed their child's emotional and social needs were being met by the school. Less than 70% of parents understand the connections between attendance and student performance. Therefore, this year, we are focused on strengthening parents’ understanding of the use of evidence to support a statement and building resilient learners. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 10% increase of parent participation and attendance in school learning events that focus on the Common Core instructional shifts, as evidenced by attendance sheets. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinaor, Guidance Counselor, Teachers, Paraprofessionals, staff, School Aides, Family worker, Social Worker, Consultant coaches and Gary Klinsky Program. Maintain and establish structures for parental involvement: Families and staff August 2017 - June 2018 ● Use the SLT structure to foster a decision-making partnership with parents ● Monthly parent meetings ● Breakfast and Lunch with the principal ● Family Counseling sessions ● Mommy and me learning sessions ● Monthly Grade-based Newsletters ● Monthly calendar of key events from Principal ● Cookshop with Parent Coordinator ● Family math and literacy nights ● Family assemblies –Bringing Books to Life ● Family Movie Night—CCLS listening and speaking standards in practice ● Family Socials (e.g. Mother-Daughter Tea, Paint by Numbers, Cooking and Math, Family Art Festival, etc..) ● Nutrition and ENL Workshops ● Parents as Partners in Reading ● Learning Leaders Volunteers ● Emergency Preparedness/ CPR 0  ● Utilize student council and student government ● Enrichment Clubs ● Program for the arts, visual, instrumental and vocal ● Spelling Bees ● Story Telling ● Class Dojo, EChalk, Translators ● Parent - Student Social and Academic Learning Trips ● Creation of a family learning sites within the building that are accessible throughout the day ● Technology to support family - teacher collaboration and learning. Technology loan program for parents 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The Gary Klinsky Program, Educational Alchemy, CITE and other partners help us support our parent engagement initiative. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent Coordinator, Partnership with CBO and other vendors, School-based staff Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 1  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we expect to see a 10% increase in attendance at parent meetings. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance sheets, Parent Coordinator Activity Log Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group, one-to-one, tutoring, pull-out, push-in, afterschool and Saturday school When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day,after school and on Saturdays Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students are selected for AIS using a variety of ways: NYS Exam scores, Performance Level on content area rubric, Fountas and Pinnel Running Record Data, Gates MacGinite assessment results, PID, Periodic Benchmark Assessments, and Scoring a level 2 on teacher-created assessments Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Cluster, enrichment and AIS teachers and service providers pull a small group of students daily to build their reading and vocabulary skills through the use of programs and rich literature, such as nonfiction texts. A group of 10 Americorps volunteers work alongside teachers in grades 3 - 5 to work with students in small groups. In addition, they pull small groups of students to build their vocabulary skills, four days a week. A group of teacher use guided reading, interactive writing and word study to target the needs of groups of students. After school and Saturday school targets Tier 2 3  Mathematics Science Social Studies Students are selected for AIS using a variety of ways: NYS Exam scores, Performance Level on content area rubric, Go Math Benchmark Assessments, PID, Periodic Benchmark Assessments, and Scoring a level 2 on teacher-created assessments Students are selected for AIS using a variety of ways: NYS Exam scores, Performance Level on content area rubric, Periodic Benchmark Assessments, and Scoring a level 2 on teacher-created assessments Students are selected for AIS using a variety of ways: Performance Level on content area rubric, PID, Periodic Benchmark Assessments, and Scoring a level 2 on students in grades 2 - 5 BoricuaCollege students and Hunter College students provide in-class support as well as pull-out services geared to meet the needs of students. After school and Saturday School teachers focus on multi-step word problems and justification During classroom periods, Science is addressed through read -alouds. Assessing students through observations, and end-of-unit assessments. Using an inquiry based approach to focus on concepts development one period per week. Preparation for the fourth grade NYS Test in May 2017 and June 2017. Specific classes are provided a deep dive into the writing process using the social studies content. Focus across grades 3 – 5 on analyzing primary source documents to support comprehension of non-fiction text Small group, one-to-one, tutoring, pull-out, push-in, afterschool and Saturday school During the school day, after school and on Saturdays Three 50 minute sessions per week Services will be provided during the school day and after school. Three 50 minute sessions per week. Services will be provided during the school day and after school. 4 At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) teacher-created assessments Students are selected for AIS using a variety of ways: Teacher recommendation, Online Occurrence and Reporting Data (OORS), Parent Request, Scoring level 2 or below on class assessments, Counselor provides counseling services as needed to students experiencing social, emotional, and academic difficulties Small group, one-to-one counseling, pull-out, push-in, afterschool and on Saturdays, as needed During the school day,after school and on Saturdays 5  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 260 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Emergency school supplies, clothing, school uniforms, wrap around support services, dental services, vision services, dietary/fitness counseling. Activities to support social-emotional well-being, coat drives, family counseling. In addition, we provide after-school intervention for our STH students in the form of homework club, reading club, math club, science club, Modern Rock Band and art club. We also offer Reading Rescue and Achieve 3000 during the school day for our students. Our girl’s empowerment club and young men’s initiative group meet on Saturdays in the school building and off-site; and, engage in cultural as well as academic experiences. . Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 6  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 7  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. o Use of Danielson, a research-based framework, to observe teachers and provide actionable feedback to continue their growth and quality instruction. o Professional development sessions focused on deepening understanding of CCLS, revising curricular tasks and research-based pedagogical practices. o Curriculum teams meet as part of our PD structure to plan curriculum, design lessons and assess pedagogy against the Danielson Framework o Administrative and teacher collaborative walk-throughs and inter-visitations will serve to norm and strengthen teachers’ understanding of effective practice o Targeted professional development is provided by consultants and lead teachers for teachers with specific areas of struggle. Funding has been set aside to build the skills of those teaching who may not meet the requirements for their assignments. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). o Use of Danielson, a research-based framework, to observe teachers and provide actionable feedback to continue their growth and quality instruction. o BFSC PDs focused on CCLS and developing units of study. o PDs and workshops focused on tier one intervention, inter-visitations to enhance instructional practices. o PDs around appropriate entry points to support and enhance instruction for all learners. 8  o One-on-one support with consultants from Brienza, ALL and Educational Alchemy, Generation Ready and other professional partnerships. o Professional development provided by lead teachers, guidance counselors, administration and consultants. University partnerships to build capacity/pipelines for teaching assistants. Paraprofessionals institute to create a pipeline for teacher positions. Funding has been set aside to build the skills of those teachers who have not meet the expectations of the instructional shifts embedded in the CCSS. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). o Outreach to preschool parents to enlighten and discuss expectations for students when they enter elementary school o Collaborative meetings with preschool and preK providers and teachers, respectively, to discuss protocols and expectations of Kindergarten and PS 149, specifically.  Parents will be provided workshops on special education  Parents will be provided workshops on learning expectations  Meetings with preschool to gather data on student 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments 9  Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Extended instructional cabinet (Grade Leader/MOSL Team), curriculum and professional development teams, made up of teachers across the grades and disciplines, meet to discuss students’ strengths and areas of weakness. Assessments are discussed and teachers are provided an opportunity to give input on the final selection of assessments used to determine students’ strengths and weaknesses. In addition to weekly grade-level team meetings, bi-weekly curriculum team meetings serve as an additional opportunity for teachers to learn how to analyze student data and use the information to inform instructional decisions. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5A,5B,5C,5D,5E,6,7 5A, 5B 5A,5B,5C,5D,5E,6,7 5A,5B,5C,5D,5E,6,7 Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 568,639.00 191,594.00 11,200.00 0 3,095,205.00 X X X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from 0  which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 1  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 149, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the ESSA, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 149 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, NYC School Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 3  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 149 in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the ESSA, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the 4  means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the ESSA; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 5  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 6  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 7  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 8  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 9  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Our results on the 2016-2017 NYS ELA Test show that about 15% of our student population in grades 3-5 were able to achieve a levels three or four. It is crucial that we strengthen our efforts and help students build a solid foundation for academic growth. Thus, our goal is to tailor instruction to support students who are underachieving. There will be one certified ENL teacher, and two classroom teacher-who are TESOL certified-and program consultants working with the students in both our after-school and Saturday program. The ENL teacher, classroom teacher, and program consultants will spend time working with small groups of students targeting the areas of literacy the data shows students struggle with the most. Additionally, students' language acquisition will be supported by socio-emotional developmental activities and events. The goal is to service Beginner and lower Intermediate level ELLs and newly arrived immigrant students in grades K through 5 by strengthening their English language skills. We also recognize the need to build their confidence and knowledge, so they can achieve standard levels on both the NYS ELA and Mathematics exams. The program would include about 40 students in grades K through 5. P.S. 149 will allocate about 60% of our Title III funds to supplement English language instruction targeting these students. The after-school program is scheduled to be held four (4) days a week from 2:30-5:30 PM, and Saturdays from 9:00 AM to 11:00 AM, starting in October 2017 and ending in April 2018. To that end, we will run after-school and Saturday intensives which include the school staff, ENL teacher, classroom teacher, and program consultants; Education Alchemy. Education Alchemy, along with the school staff, will help to support the academic needs and the social-emotional needs of the Beginner and Intermediate ELLs and our newly arrived immigrant students using consumable materials and research based strategies and practices. The after-school program will be held four times a week (Monday - Thursday) from 2:30 PM to 5:30 PM from October to April. The program will run for approximately 35 weeks. Our after-school program will target students in grades 3-5; the goal of the after-school program is to help our English Language Learners and newly arrived students develop and strengthen their skills in the content areas. There will be two teachers who will be working with our students during this time. Ms. N. Huda, who is our certified ENL teacher, and Ms. J. Calizaire, a 5th grade classroom teacher, TESOL certified. The students will be grouped according to their computational skills and English Language Proficiency. There will be a total of two classes with approximately 16-20 students in each class; students will work in 4 groups of 5 students. To assist these students and teacher, there will be 2 members from Education Alchemy in each classroom. This will ensure that students are able to help each other in at least one aspect of their learning. The after-school program will consist of two groups. There will be approximately 20 students in each group; students will work in 4 groups of 5 students. This will help ensure that students are able to help each other in at least one aspect of their learning. Our after-school program will 0  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information consist of two groups facilitated by two teachers. Group 1, led by Ms. Huda, will consist of 2nd and 3rd grade students. Group 2, led by Ms. Calizaire, will consist of 4th and 5th grade students. Students will work in rotations so that they are meeting with Ms. Huda for 45 minutes, and with Ms. Calizaire for 45 minutes. Ms. Huda will focus on ELA instruction and English language acquisition, while Ms. Calizaire will focus on the content area of math. Students will work with Ms. Huda for 45 minutes for ELA. During this time, they will work in 4 groups of 5 students; paired according to their grade and proficiency level. When students conclude their 45 minutes with Ms. Huda, they will switch and rotate to Ms. Calizaire. Both Ms. Huda and Ms. Calizaire will consult with each other and ensure the use of ELL modifications and strategies to better service the ELL/newly arrived students. Both teachers will discuss how to implement the English Language Arts Progression within the curriculum to help students meet their learning goals. During the sessions, the teachers will also be using the reading material furnished from TC reading and writing, which is our reading and writing program and these will be supplemented by classroom libraries and Scholastic. The teachers also have an account with ReadingA-Z, Raz-kids, VocabularyA-Z, and WritingA-Z. These are annual subscription based-electronic programs that the students will use in the classroom on their laptops. Teachers will also utilize a math program-Go Math, as well as EngageNY. Go Math targets students who are in need of supplemental support. Teachers will utilize this program to help students transition from using manipulative to conceptualizing and using mental math. The Go Math program targets the different operations students need to succeed and make progress at their current grade level. In addition to computational support, Go Math also provides teachers with guidance in implementing language support as well. This will allow us to help our students in deconstructing math problems prior to solving them. For additional math support, our students will use the online program-ThinkCentral. This is aligned with our Go Math program. The students can access this in other than English if needed. There are interactive math games and videos that support the math content. During our students math sessions, the teachers will reinforce our school wide strategy, SOLVE.S=study the problem-read and underline the question: What is the question asking?O= organize the facts-identify the facts. Eliminate unnecessary facts.L=line up a plan-look for key words to help you choose an operation. Then think about what you will do.V=verify your plan with an action-estimate your answer (more/less). Carry out your plan (solve the problem)E=explain your answer-say/write exactly what you did and why it makes sense.During the reading sessions, students will carry over the strategies used during the day. For example, they will stop and jot. As they read students will stop and jot down ideas that relate to the main idea, or quotes from characters , or they may make a prediction based on what they just read.Also, the staff members will be front loading vocabulary and the students will be looking for clues in the reading to determine the meaning of the terms. The Saturday Academy is held for 10 weeks (10 sessions) from January to April. The session begins at 8:30 AM and concludes at 12:30 PM (four hours). Records will be maintained by the ENL teacher in a designated folder and are provided on request. In addition, the Saturday program is supervised by our Principal, Ms. Yvette Donald, at no cost to the Title III. The program is offered to 15 students in grades Kindergarten-2nd grade. Students in grades K-2 are grouped according to their grade and proficiency level and their abilities to support one another in small group. Group 1 will consist of kindergarten students, and Group 2 will consist of 1st and 2nd grade students. In our Saturday program; 5 students are in kindergarten, 5 students are in 1st grade, and 5 students are in 2nd grade. Group 1 consists of 5 students, while Group 2 consists of 10 students. During instruction time, Group 2 is separated further and students are paired in groups of 3. The language of instruction is English, which is modified to student's language proficiency. Our certified ENL teacher, Ms. Huda, will work with students in small group for targeted instruction and effective 1  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information learning. Students in grades K-2 are grouped according to their proficiency level and their abilities to support one another in small group. The group consists of three students, with a total of two groups. The language of instruction is English, which is modified to student's language proficiency. Our certified ENL teacher, Ms. Huda, will work with students in small group for targeted instruction and effective learning. The ENL teacher will utilize the LearningA-Z (ReadingA-Z, Raz-Kids, WritingA-Z, and VocabularyA-Z) subscriptions to provide support for our English Language Learners. Students will work in small group and focus on strengthening their oral language and demonstrating their learning through reading and writing. While Ms. Huda is working with Group 1, Group 2 will read independently on Raz-Kids and complete the assigned material. When Ms. Huda is working with Group 1, her focus is to address to the standards using ELL support and modifications. When Group 1 concludes with their small group instruction, they will rotate and complete their assigned readings and assignments on Raz-Kids. Ms. Huda will then work closely with group 2. Raz-Kids and Learning A-Z provide students with the opportunity to choose texts that are relevant to their learning needs and interests. While it is done independently, it is followed with comprehension questions in small group instruction. Students share text information and provide the details needed to complete a graphic organizer. Graphic organizers are provided based on the reading skill of the students in the group. This may differ based on students' abilities as some students are learning to provide key details, while others are able to provide sequence of events, problem/solution, cause/effect, etc. While completing their reports, the teacher and students discuss the language and vocabulary of the text and how it relates to the skill on the assigned graphic organizer. Graphic organizers are used to further assist ELLs in the comprehension of the text. The materials used in both these programs will consist of technology that will allow students to self-assess and make improvements as they grow. Students will be engaged in the Raz-Kids Reading Program where they are assigned books to read at their level of proficiency, and track their progress as they advance. The tools in this program will allow students to monitor and build on their achievement. Additionally, students will use Reading A-Z which will allow teachers to provide reading materials according to their students’ levels of proficiency. In addition to focusing on reading and comprehension, students will also have subscriptions to math online/think central, and interactive and animated math games. This online math program consists of animated and engaging programs that enable students to self-assess their work and solution paths. Along with technology, students will also use consumable texts and art/craft supplies. All records will be maintained by the classroom teacher, as well as the ENL teacher. Translated parent letters, student attendance and student data from the program will be kept safely in a storage area and provided on request. Students who are a part of our after-school program are referred by their classroom teacher for their area of development. Teachers make this decision based on their current class data from the scores from the pre-, mid- and post exams. Our school utilizes a variety of assessment tools to monitor student progress. This includes; Fountas and Pinnell, Pre and post assessment using Teachers College, and Math prerequisite, beginning, middle and end of year assessments from EngageNY. Teachers also prepare assessments to track progress throughout the lesson. The data gathered from these assessments allow us to identify the students who need targeted support. Our teachers analyze the data in grade team meetings and identify those students who may need additional, targeted support through our Saturday Academy. The school uses this data to place students into groups (below, on and above). We use the NYSESLAT, as well as the ELA and Math State Examinations to identify our focus students. The data from these assessments indicate which students continue to need support to make grade level progress. Data patterns across these assessments allow us to identify those students who are in need of further support. Our data shows that ELLs who have been testing 2  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information with us within the past two years have shown progress across all modalities of the NYSESLAT. This includes; more than 50% increase in all modalities (speaking, listening, reading, and writing). We use this information to further identify students who require targeted support in our enrichment programs. Home language support is available through various texts such as translated books and dictionaries. Core materials are provided on audio with supporting visuals. Bilingual books are available for both beginner and intermediate students. The ENL teacher also utilizes various images and media to help support students based on the content. Assignments are provided based on students’ reading abilities and comprehension. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Professional Development is a way to strengthen and enhance a teacher's craft and supply our teachers with tools and strategies to meet the needs of all students; whether these students are general education, special needs students or English Language Learners. Teachers learning new strategies will only be a positive impact on the academic growth of all of our students and thus will increase the achievement level of all of our students. As such, we will allocate a portion of our Title III funding to support these professional development opportunities. We, at P. S. 149, maintain ongoing professional development for our entire staff to meet the needs of all our students. During this time, teachers work on data analysis and its impact on lesson delivery, unpacking the NY State Standards/ and meeting Learning progressions in math and ELA. The more the teachers learn about the needs of their students, through the data and grade team discussions, the more our students benefit for the teacher learning. Teachers will receive ongoing professional development from September 2017 to June 2018 from school based staff and program consultants. The ENL teacher and our Consultants, will meet with the ELA curriculum team twice per month, as well as the math curriculum team. The teachers will spend 80 minutes sharing strategies for our ELL and newly arrived students. The teams will meet again the following week on Tuesday, for 30 minutes, to discuss the success and challenges of the strategies that were implemented in class. Some of the topics for discussion are a framework for instruction: differentiated instruction; analyzing and utilizing data, Common Core Learning Standards- ELA and math; creating and adjusting curriculum maps; differentiating instruction to meet the needs of the ELL and newly arrived student population. In addition, support is provided to all staff members by our on-site Literacy Coach, Math Coach (K - 2), Education Alchemy staff and other staff developers. Our ESL teacher will attend workshops designed to benefit ENL and newly arrived immigrant students, when offered, and will then turn key learning to grade leads and program teachers who will share at their grade team meetings. 3  Part C: Professional Development Our ENL teachers will meet with the ELA and Math team beginning in October and concluding in May. Ms. Huda, our TESOL certified ENL teacher, will meet with the ELA team on the first Monday of every month for 80 minutes, and will do a follow-up the following Tuesday for 30 minutes. In addition to the ELA team meetings, our other TESOL certified ENL teacher, Ms. McManus, will meet with the Math team. Ms. McManus and the Math team will meet the 3rd Monday of every month, and will also do a follow-up the following Tuesday. Consistency in these meetings will help us support our ELLs who can utilize these strategies and grow as their teachers grow. The tentative schedule is as follows: ELA team (1st Monday of every month) Math team (3rd Monday of every month) Chancellor's Professional Development Day - Nov. 7, 2017 October 2nd October 16th November 76h November 13th December 4th December 11th January 1st (school closed) January 15th February 5th February 12th March 5th March 12th April 9th April 16th May 7th May 14th During the PD, teachers will discuss strategies they will use to meet the needs of the different learners in the class. This will include specific ELL strategies that can be utilized across the different content areas. Classroom teachers will be informed about effective practices to help assist their ELLs develop proficiency across the modalities of reading, writing, listening, and speaking. The PDs will be conducted by the certified ENL instructors in our building; Ms. J McManus and Ms. N Huda, with Ms. J Calizaire currently enrolled in a TESOL certification program at Hunter College. Two of our ENL teachers are classroom teachers, Ms. McManus and Ms. Calizaire, with one teacher, Ms. Huda, providing integrated and stand-alone ENL services. While Ms. McManus is not on the instructional component of the plan she is often willing to lend us her expertise in the area of ENL to help support our teachers. Professional development agendas and attendance will be collected at the conclusion of every meeting. They will be stored by our assistant principal who will have a designated area for all the paperwork associated with the PD. During all our Professional Development sessions, teachers are required to sign in next to their name, and also receive an agenda. The originals are kept here at the school in a Professional Development binder. During grade team meetings, when teachers turn-key, they also maintain an agenda and a sign-in sheet which is kept in the grade team binder. Professional development opportunities attended by our ENL teacher and classroom teacher are at a cost, as they require us to call upon a substitute teacher in the classroom teacher’s absence. In addition to the expenses for the substitute teachers, the ENL teacher and other classroom teachers who turn-key the PD often do so during meetings that occur during the after-school hours. Teachers who attend these scheduled PDs are reimbursed through per-session rates. 4  Part C: Professional Development Our teachers attend PD opportunities provided by LearningA-Z, which are on-going. Each session provides teachers with more information on how to use the features on the sites, incorporating learning with technology. Teachers have also attended PD sessions offered by NYU’s The Steinhardt School of Culture, Education, and Human Development to help incorporate the Bilingual Common Core Progressions with the New York State Common Core State Standards. In addition to these PD sessions, teachers will meet with the ENL teachers twice per month for both math and ELA. The teachers will share strategies for about 80 minutes, and will meet again the following week, for 30 minutes, to discuss the success and challenges implemented by the teacher. The PD sessions will occur every month until the end of the school year, as we strongly believe that consistency in these meetings will lead to an effective outcome in teacher practices and student learning. Our teachers who provide these PDs will do so in a manner which does not affect their classroom instruction. These PDs will be held during the extended time on Mondays, or during team meetings which occur in the after-school hours. Our teachers will continue to attend PDs that support the development and success of our ELL students, and will also continue to inform their colleagues about effective teaching practices for our students. Our ENL teacher and two other classroom teachers-one newly state certified in ENL and one currently enrolled in a TESOL certification program-will be attending professional development at New York University on how to align and incorporate the Language Arts Progression Standards with the New York State Common Core State Standards. This will lead to an enhancement of our teachers’ lessons and will begin to meet the learning needs of all our students. As these teachers complete these sessions, they will return and turn-key the learning to their colleagues during professional development time to the entire staff. During the outside professional development, presented by New York University, our teachers will receive strategies on how to incorporate and deliver lessons in literacy and reading for our ELL population during class and during our afterschool and Saturday program. Learning A to Z, which has a contract with NYC, also has professional development opportunities for teachers. Our ENL teacher will attend professional development on the full use of the LearningA-Z subscription programs. It has a full program for English Language Learners. Our ENL teacher will then turn-key these sessions for our staff, this well help our teachers with support as they will have knowledge of the vast resources that they may use for enhanced instruction. Also, our ENL teacher will present to staff members professional development on how to deliver phonics lessons using the proficiency levels of our ELL students. This will make the phonics lessons more accessible for our ELL students. She will also work with teachers on how to scaffold writing lessons for our ELL students and introduce scaffolds to the teachers. The professional development activities will positively impact progress of ELLs as it will provide teachers with the opportunity to understand and meet the needs of our students. Teachers take part in various PD activities which help to broaden their techniques and strategies as applied to the ELL population. Teachers utilize students’ prior knowledge, experiences, and native background and incorporate this to the learning which takes place in the classroom. Our teachers continue to learn about ELLs, their needs and the various stages of language acquisition. With their acquired knowledge they are able to identify areas of focus, create and implement lessons and monitor progress to continue to develop both content and language as appropriate for their grade level. 5  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: The school will conduct workshops and activities to build our ELL parents’ and our newly arrived students' parents awareness and to keep them informed of the support available for their children’s learning and success. Monthly activities and workshops are varied to address different needs. Title III funds will be utilized to support these workshops for our ELL parents. Our students' parents will receive notification of all activities and workshops in English, Spanish, Bengali, and Arabic- the main languages of our students. Materials are translated in other languages as needed, if families speaking other languages are in our school. Translators are available when requested by the parent. Parents and students will participate in these activities with support of our staff members. We have staff members who can assist Spanish speaking parents and students, which tend to be the largest group in our school population. We also have teachers who speak Arabic and Bengali and are available upon request; these teachers are able to support the 2nd and 3rd largest ELL groups. In addition to the language support, we also have our parent coordinator, Ms. Donna White and our Guidance Counselor, Ms. L. Strachan, will be facilitating family events/workshops and building and maintaining a relationship with the families of our students. These workshops with members from city agencies provide, distribute, and explain services that our families may need. Translation services, and other modes of support, are made available as part of every presentation. Other topics will focus on both ELA and mathematics. Tentatively, we will be beginning our parent workshops in November 2017. Some of our upcoming topics are: "Helping your children with Homework", "Reading at home", "How to effectively study for a test", and "Good test taking strategies" - "New Language New Culture" "Shopping and Cooking for Increase Math Understanding". Activities will include Curriculum Night; Literacy and Response Workshops; Game Night-literacy/math games; Parent Attendance Support; Attendance and its impact on student achievement; Career Day; Literacy in Class Celebrations; Family Movie nights; Arts Festival and Family Field Day. In addition, parents are encouraged to accompany their children on Cultural field trips to learn alongside their children. Workshops and activities will be developed and conducted by our in-house staff; District Support staff; Education Alchemy; the Gary Klinsky Agency and other consultant partners. Our records are maintained by the assistant principal who stores any information associated with these activities; such as translated invitation letters, agenda, attendance sheets and any other information culminating from these events. Our assistant principal will reach out to the staff members who will help assist in translating letters or make phone calls home in the parents’ preferred language. Most often, students receive invitations to take home and are asked to return it with parent signature. Workshops are schedule tentatively, but most likely occurring once a month leading up to the State Exams. Each session runs from approximately 5:00 PM to 7:00 PM. The workshops are facilitated by our assistant principal, Mr. Carlo DeGregorio. In addition to our assistant principal, workshops and activities will also be conducted by our classroom teachers-including the ENL teachers, and Educational Alchemy and The Gary Klinsky Agency. Both Educational 6 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Alchemy and The Gary Klinsky Agency help support numerous ELL students in K-5 with after-school academic support in homework and content areas. As these workshops will be facilitated by the ENL teachers, in conjunction with the classroom teachers, the cost of the program will be the per-session rates provided to teachers for their time and effort during these workshops. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 7  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 19 School Name The Danny Kaye School Borough Brooklyn School Number 149 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Yvette Donald Coach Stacy Easton ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Naila Huda Teacher/Subject Area Jazmaine Calizaire Teacher/Subject Area Jaclyn McManus Related-Service Provider Sheriann O'garro Superintendent Dr. Thomas McBryde Jr. Assistant Principal Carlo DeGregorio Coach Not Yet Hired School Counselor Catherine Ettkins Parent Jennifer Brooks Parent Coordinator Donna White Field Support Center Staff Member Atara Boker Other (Name and Title) Melba Willocks C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 2 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Total number of ELLs 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 ELLs as share of total student population (%) % 8  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown Program TBE Lang. School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) SELECT ONEYesNo K 1 2 SELECT ONEYesNo 3 0 TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 No NO No NO NO NO 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 10 11 12 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 9  5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The formative assessment tools our school uses include Fountas and Pinnell, Pre and post assessment using Teachers College Writing for Literacy, and Math prerequisite, beginning, middle, and end of year assessments utilizing the release questions from Engage NY. Our teachers also informally assess students throughout the course of each lesson. Teachers utilize rubrics and checklists aligned to each task to help guide student student work. This is also done in small group instruction when teachers conference with the students. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. In order to support student growth and demonstrate progress, our plan is to implement Foundations, Reading Reform, Reciprocal Reading, Teachers College Reading and Writing, Reading A-Z, and Raz-Kids. The data gathered from these assessments allow us to identify our students’ needed area of focus, as well as their strengths. Our teachers address this data in grade team meetings and adjust their instructional next steps. The ENL teacher, in collaboration with the classroom teachers, is able to use differentiated instruction and organize flexible groupings. b. TBE program. If applicable. The summative assessments our school uses to identify baseline, progress and areas of need are NYSESLAT Speaking and Listening/Reading/Writing, New York State English Language Arts and Mathematics exam, end of year Science and Performance Test for students in fourth grade, as well as the city-wide implemented Gates-MacGinitie for students in the second grade. c. DL program. If applicable. Based on these findings, our plan is to implement supplemental support for the needs of our children. In grades K-2, we offer an after-school program called Cub Club. Cub Club focuses on homework help, reading development and comprehension skill building. In grades 3-5, we offer Educational Alchemy. Educational Alchemy is also an after-school program that focuses on homework help, building skills and strategies in Mathematics, English Language Arts as well as preparation for the state assessments. We also offer Saturday Academy for students in the testing grades who need additional support.These students are identified by the classroom teachers as well as target areas for needed support in reading comprehension, writing, and mathematical computation. The teachers use materials from EngageNY Released questions in ELA and Math. The teachers require the students to defend and justify their responses based on the T/C model and S. O. L. V. E. We also invite students to take part in our Danny Kaye Language Academy which takes place on Saturdays. During this time, the ENL teacher works works with entering and emerging level students to develop language. In addition to the above programs, our school also offers the Gary 0  Klinsky afterschool program, our Community Based Partnership, which provides students with homework assistance and implements a curriculum using S. T. E. M. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The school uses data to strategically place students into tiered groups (below, on, and above). The classroom teacher provides small group instruction using the core curriculum. The ENL instructor uses a research based program to provide additional instruction based upon students’ needs. Based on this data, students are welcomed to take part in several after school enrichment programs, as well as Saturday Academy. During this time, students receive individualized instruction in Literacy and Math. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. We use the NYSESLAT, ELA and Math State Examination data to evaluate the effectiveness of our ELL program. The data indicates that our students continue to need support to make progress on the NYS ELA Exam as most of them scored a level two or below. This information is consistent with their performance on the NYSESLAT writing modality. Specifically, data patterns across proficiency levels identified on the NYSESLAT indicate that about 16% of our ELL population has scored the level of ‘commanding’ effectively testing out of the program. For ELLs who have been testing with us within the last two years; 54% have progressed in Speaking, 66% have progressed in Listening, 71% have progressed in reading, followed by 57% in Writing within the modalities of the NYSESLAT exam. We use this data to identify which students need targeted support. The results of the different modalities allow us to provide targeted instruction and create flexible groupings. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? In order to make adjustments to the program, utilizing the data from state measures, we meet with teacher teams to discuss progress made and instructional next steps in both ELA and Math. The ENL instructor and classroom teachers meet twice a month to discuss the best way to support students in academic development. The ENL instructor, in collaboration with the classroom teachers, will plan lessons to address students’ needs. These lessons are taught in both an integrated and stand-alone model. The ENL instructor will hold on-going conferences with the students to determine their learning goals, identify areas of improvement, and discuss strategies that meet individual students’ needs across curriculum/content. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status P.S. 149 has a population of 675 students. The majority of our students speak English with Spanish being the next dominant language. Other languages represented throughout the grades include Arabic, Bengali, Haitian Creole, and Fulani. Native language abilities range from early speech emergence through intermediate fluency. Our parents overwhelmingly select ENL, therefore we offer ENL services to all our ELL students this year. Supplemental programs for our students include our After School Enrichment Programs such as Cub Club (students K-2) Educational Alchemy (students 3-5), Saturday Academy, Saturday Language Academy, and Gary Klinsky After-school Program (students K-5). At P.S. 149 our teachers are highly qualified and they use a wide range of instructional strategies to meet the needs of our students. We have one ENL provider who delivers both integrated and stand-alone services for our K-4 population. We also have Ms. J. McManus and Ms. J. Calizaire who both assist with stand-alone services. Both teachers each provide two periods of stand-alone services per week. Students are provided ENL services as both an integrated and stand-alone model based on level of performance on the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL identification. The students are clustered and may be pulled from two to three different 1  classrooms. For example, in the stand-alone model, the students in a grade band will be serviced depending on their proficiency as indicated by the NYSESLAT or NYSITELL. There are approximately 70 ELL students. These students receive from 90 minutes to 360 minutes of ELL instruction per week, based on their proficiency level. Learning activities build on the richness of students' prior knowledge and experiences. The ENL teacher uses the Sheltered Instructional Approach to develop the students' proficiency in English and to enhance their communication skills. The teacher is also able to build the students' content area knowledge and academic skills with this approach. Through a variety of scaffolding strategies, the teacher supports the students and deepens their learning in content areas. Higher Order Thinking Skills (based on the DOK) are emphasized and the print rich classroom environment reflects the student's culture and languages. Cognitive academic skills such as critical thinking, use of graphic organizers, the writing process, comparing and contrasting, making inferences, drawing conclusions, number sense and problem solving are used to widen the students' skills in English. Instructional approaches and programs include Teachers College for Writing, Ready Gen as a resource with teachers implementing Teachers College Reading and Writing, Reading Reform, Reciprocal Reading, with an emphasis on phonemic awareness in English, Reading A-Z, Raz-Kids, differentiation of instruction, small group and individualized instruction. Leveled books in classrooms reflect topics in all the content areas (math, science, and social studies). Much of these materials are available in both English and Spanish. The math reading materials used are available in both languages. Before moving into text, the teacher provides opportunities for the students to have a wide range of hands-on experiences including the use of manipulatives and trips to build students' understanding of concept. Spanish math text materials are used with those students who need additional support. Technology including the use of Internet resources such as Starfall, Raz-Kids, ABCYA, books on DVD in both English and Spanish are utilized throughout the day. In addition, the ENL instructor will push-in to support those students with special education in their classroom. For our beginner ELLs with disabilities, the ENL instructor co-plans with the special education teachers one day a week to ensure that students are consistently being provided research-based language acquisition strategies that support their learning needs. To supplement our students' growth both socially and academically, we encourage our ELLs to participate in extra-curricular activities that involve music and singing. Our ELL students are invited to become members of Little Kids Rock and Glee. Over the years we have seen a growth in these students, since they learned to sing in English. Another extra-curricular activity is HERstory. This program is available to girls, and enhances their social/emotional growth through collaborative peer interactions, cultural trips, shows, and eventually publishing a book of poetry and narrative writing. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Not Applicable 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Not applicable 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. To ensure the mandated numbers of instructional minutes are met for each proficiency level in ENL services, the staff organizes for 100 minute curriculum blocks. This structure facilitates the delivery of ENL instruction; 360 minutes for beginners and low intermediate level ELLs (those who scored ‘Entering’ and ‘Emerging'), 180 minutes for intermediate and advanced level ELLs (those who scored ‘Transitioning’ and ‘Expanding’), and 90 minutes for ELLs who scored proficient on the NYSESLAT (those who scored ‘Commanding’). Based on the five proficiency levels for ELLs, students are provided with instructional support. Beginner/Entering ELLs are entitled to 360 minutes of ENL services; 180 minutes will be allocated to standalone ENL, while 180 minutes will be integrated ENL/ELA. Low intermediate/Emerging ELLs will also receive 360 minutes of services; 90 minutes of standalone ENL, 180 integrated ENL/ELA, with an option of 90 minutes standalone or integrated ENL/ELA. Intermediate/Transitioning level ELLs are provided with 180 minutes of ENL services, 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA, with an option of 90 minutes standalone or integrated ENL/ELA. Advanced/Expanding level students are provided with 180 minutes of ENL services; these minutes will be allocated to integrated ENL/ELA. The last group of students is those who received a score of proficient on the NYSESLAT. Although these students are no longer an ELL, they are given 90 minutes 2  of ENL/ELA services per week. At this time, we have one ENL provider for students in grades K-4. The ENL instructor works with students in both the integrated and stand-alone model. For students in the 5th grade, we have Ms. J. Calizaire and Mrs. J. McManus who work with students on ENL support as well as in the subject areas of Science, Social Studies, ELA and Math. They also each provide two periods of stand-alone services. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? During the 100 minute instructional block, the ELL students are supported by the ENL teacher in all content areas. Students' areas of improvement are noted and collaboratively addressed with the classroom teacher so that initial and follow-up lessons are planned and delivered appropriately. New students are allowed to express responses in native language while building English vocabulary. Differentiated instruction, strategic discussion techniques, and teacher team analysis of ELL work result in additional support for our English Language Learners. Utilizing classroom data allows for the appropriate increase of scaffolding, graphic organizers, multiple turn and talks, explicit vocabulary instruction, among others. ELLs will meet the demands of NYS Learning Standards through teacher support and guidance. While maintaining rigor and high standards, teachers will modify, scaffold and differentiate instruction to meet the needs of the students in the classroom. Teachers will be more mindful in developing curriculum and instruction that is grade-level appropriate for students and their academic growth. Teachers will encourage students to develop reading and writing practices that students will strengthen throughout their academic years. Teachers and students will also take the time needed to develop deeper levels of understanding of grade-level appropriate content for both ELA and Math. In order to assist students in accomplishing these goals, teachers and students will explore and clarify the standards that students are expected to develop. In doing so, students will have a better understanding of the standards and how to master them. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We provide ENL services therefore native language evaluation does not apply. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Based on students' proficiency level, work performance and student data in the content areas and literacy; they are grouped based on their instructional needs. ELLs who test Proficient/Commanding are provided additional instructional periods to support their learning needs. At this time we have three SIFE students. As students are permitted to the school, our Registration Team has a conversation with the parents to gain a full understanding of the child's need. The Family Assistant/Attendance Teachers make home visits and phone calls to keep in touch with families to ensure that students come to school every day. Based on their age, these students would be enrolled in extended day programs including afterschool, subject to funding. Newcomers receive differentiated instruction as they are grouped on the basis of their educational needs. Those needs are aggressively targeted and addressed through academic intervention and increased ENL instruction. Students who are new to the U.S. are provided with ENL services as mandated by CR Part 154 for 360 minutes of instruction in ENL strategies for beginners and low intermediate students. Students are immersed in language and print rich environments. Additional extension day programs such as After-school, Saturday Academy, and the Klinsky - after-school programs provide enrichment, homework help, and hands on experiences. The use of highly motivational technology based ENL programs help to reinforce learning. Open lines of communication are maintained with parents through numerous workshops held throughout the year. Letters sent to parents are translated into native language either by in-house translation or the DOE translation unit. Ongoing analysis of data is used to track students’ progress. Students receive enrichment through activities such as Art, Sports, and Music. City Year volunteers in classrooms help to provide individualized instruction to students. Computer Centers in classrooms and the use of Listening Centers support and reinforce new concepts and strategies. Plans for long-term ELLs and Former ELLs include, after school (Educational Alchemy, Gary Klinsky), Saturday Academy, Saturday Language Academy and, as funding permits, extracurricular enrichment activities. Long-term ELLs are provided with opportunities to be immersed in their native language as well as English. Some students are provided with “at-risk” services where they are provided with one to one or small group instruction in after-school programs. A “Lunch with the Teacher” intervention program provides additional reinforcement or enrichment experiences to build skills. Additional support is provided through the SETSS program. These students participate in any available Afterschool Programs two days per week and on Saturdays, subject to funding. In all of these programs they receive more individualized attention tailored to meet their needs. When working with Long-term and Former ELLs, curriculum materials and resources used with these students are the 3  same as used by teachers for students in the monolingual classrooms. Instruction and strategies are scaffolded for these ELL students and they receive more intensive individualized instruction based on their areas of need. Leveled books in the classrooms, non-fiction trade books, technological programs and resources are used to build their learning. Trips, manipulatives, hands-on experiences, explicitly taught vocabulary, and enrichment activities through the arts help to promote their language development. Native language literature based classroom libraries, dictionaries and other supplementary materials are used to promote their progress. Some students with IEP’s are mainstreamed into regular education classes according to their areas of strength. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The ENL instructor confers with the IEP teacher and then uses the goals indicated on the IEP to address specific academic needs of the ELL-SWD. All grades implement the Common Core programs, Teacher’s College, ReadyGen and Go Math. These programs are supplemented with Foundations, Reading Reform,Reciprocal Reading, EngageNY Released Questions in ELA and Mathematics, Reading A to Z, Think Central (our online math program), Readworks, and multi-sensory instructional strategies and scaffolds to support the needs of this special population. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? During our reorganization for the 2017-2018 school year, we are placing our ELL students into the same grade homeroom. That is, for each grade, a specific teacher has been identified as the homeroom teacher chosen by skill, to instruct these students. When possible, they will have a homeroom teacher who is able to communicate with these students directly. These teachers will collaborate with the ENL teacher on a regular basis to enhance his/her strategies and instructional skills. The school provides text materials in various languages, and flexibly schedule ELL-SWDs into general education classrooms with Spanish speaking teachers who plan with the ENL in order to support language and disability needs. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. In addition to ENL services provided to our students during the day, these students also receive additional intervention services from other teachers such as the Reading Intervention Teacher or the SETTS teacher in the school: targeted students in grades 2, 3, 4 & 5 receive Reading/Writing Support through combination of push-in/pullout services. Short reading passages and discussion help to develop the students' skills in areas such as identifying the main idea, sequencing and making inferences. Leveled non-fiction texts are also use to build the students' comprehension skills in Science and Social Studies. In addition, number songs, drills, the use of manipulatives and real-life problems help to develop the students' math skills. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We have been chosen to have a literacy coach for the students in grades K-2,. This assigned Literacy Coach will work with teachers to strengthen their instruction and instructional strategies with students in grades K - 2. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We do not have any certified bilingual teachers in our programs. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? All students in our school have equal access to all school programs. After-school services this year will be offered through our Title 3 monies. Parents of ELLs are sent letters, translated into their home languages, inviting students to participate in our programs. Last year, 50% of our ELLs took advantage of the opportunity. Other students and families preferred to participate on Saturday. The goal is to develop and conduct a program 2 days per week on Tuesdays and Thursdays from 3 - 4:30 p.m. and host Saturday School from 9 - 12pm for students. In addition to these programs, we also offer several after school programs, such as; the Gary Klinsky program (grades K-5), Education Alchemy (grades 3-5), and Cub Club (grades 1 and 2). Parents are provided parallel ENL support during after school and at Saturday School. 18. For schools with dual language programs: 4  a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Our instructional tools and resources include the use of Wordly Wise Vocabulary Program, the use of Listening and Computer Centers, LeapFrog devices and Ipads with language translation. Students are provided books on tape and use laptops to access content specific websites with language translation features, such as Think Central, to support learning. Students also have access to Raz-Kids, Science A-Z, and Writing A-Z. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? In our ENL class, 25% of the materials are in native language and the rest is in English. Core materials are provided on audio and accompanied by visuals with language captions. Bilingual trade books are available for beginner and intermediate ELL students. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our Integrated and Stand-alone ENL model supports students by providing them with small group instruction. During instruction, students are guided to read leveled books and culturally related literature to facilitate language acquisition. Core and support materials have content and vocabulary that is age and grade appropriate. Our online math component, Think Central can assist students with other than English. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Not applicable 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Newly enrolled testing grade ELLs are offered an opportunity to enroll in our summer program. Students in grades K - 2 are provided an opportunity to join our Community-Based Organization, Klinsky, which runs an academic and enrichment-based summer program. We offer several enrichment programs at our school. In each program, we have different content teachers who are able to provide assistance to our students. In our outside program, Educational Alchemy, we service students in grades 3-5. In that program we have; Ms. S. Easton (Literacy Coach and program coordinator), Ms. Sterling (3rd grade lead and classroom teacher), Mr. K. Clarke (3rd grade Math teacher), Ms. Mohammed (4th grade lead and ELA teacher), Ms. P. Gonzalez (4th grade classroom teacher), Ms. J. Calizaire (5th grade lead and ELA teacher), and Ms. J. Sanders (5th grade Special Education teacher). These teachers also take part in our Saturday Academy program. For students in K-2, we have several teachers who 5  assist in the instructional component of the program; Ms. E. Waters (Assistant Principal and Program Supervisor), Ms. E Healy (AIS and Program Coordinator), Ms. S. Chandrashekhar (1st grade teacher), Ms. Y. Banks (3rd grade classroom teacher) and Ms. J. Wright (Pre-K lead and classroom teacher). Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. We do not offer language electives. 6 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, We currently do not have a dual language program. , testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 7  Part VI: LAP Assurances 8  our from the teacher team and grade students benefit discussions, the more School Name: We, at P. S. 149, maintain ongoing professional development for our entire staff to meet the needs of all our students. During this time, teachers work on data analysis and its impact on lesson delivery, unpacking the NY State Standards/ and meeting Learning progressions in math and ELA. The more the teachers learn about the needs of their students, through the data learning. All teachers participate in professional development activities. Teachers who support ELLs meet as a cohort to engage in other professional development activities that are particular and specific to meet the needs of the students they serve. They attend in house based Professional Development through our consultants - Brianza, Educational Alchemy, Generation Ready, and Reciprocal Reading and district based professional development sessions that are geared to increasing their skills and abilities to create literacy and mathematically enriched classrooms. A variety of strategies and techniques are used to make content comprehensible to the learner. Teachers are learning about Sheltered Instructional Observation Protocol as an approach to support language acquisition for students across the ELL spectrum. Teachers use the workshop model to deliver lessons. Teachers model through the use of read-aloud, students participate during shared reading, work cooperatively during guided reading, and work on their own independent reading. Appropriate reading approaches incorporate the students’ prior knowledge, experiences, and cultural background into the reading and writing activities. School DBN: The school will provide professional development opportunities to all teachers that relate to the needs of the ELLs in the building. Non-ELL teachers will receive a minimum of 15% professional development hours to strengthen their understanding on second language acquisition, while also focusing on teaching strategies and instruction geared to English Language Learners. All ELL teachers will receive a minimum of 50% professional development hours that will help strengthen understanding of language acquisition, while also aligning to the Common Core State Standards. Staff will also focus on co-teaching strategies in order to ensure the most effective classroom environment possible for students' learning needs. Records of professional development hours are recorded by the school administration as well as individual teachers. Staff members are required to note hours/days of professional development opportunities. Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Title Signature Principal Name (PRINT) The school will make an effort to meet with every parent/guardian of English Language Learners a minimum of once a year, in addition to parent-teacher conferences, parent orientation, or other scheduled meetings that are provided throughout the year. During this time, we will discuss the overall goal of the program, students’ result on the NYSESLAT/NYSITELL/Spanish-Lab, and any additional concerns from the parent related to the academic development of the child. The ENL instructor and Parents will discuss the different modalities of the exam, and consider students' strengths and areas of improvement. Translation services will be provided, through our consultants, for those who speak a language other than English. In addition to the ENL instructor, additional staff members will be present to Date (mm/dd/yy) The school will hold workshops to incorporate our ELL’s parents involvement and keep them informed of the students’ progress and success. Activities and workshops are varied once a month to encourage parental involvement. Workshops will be conducted to deepen parents' understanding of the curriculum, goals and expectations for their children through sessions on ELA and Math Common Core Standards, and a workshop on preparing their children for the NYS Tests including NYSESLAT. Social activities such as Zumba Dancing and Cook-shop help to heighten parents’ communications skills and to encourage their active participation in ongoing programs and resources. Workshops on the use of technology will also be conducted for the parents 9  assist parents in the process. To accommodate parents who are unable to attend the initial meeting, we will offer parents the opportunity to attend multiple sessions throughout the course of the year. Assistant Principal PS 149 Danny Kaye Parent Coordinator Yvette Donald ENL/Bilingual Teacher Carlo DeGregorio Parent Donna White Teacher/Subject Area Naila Huda Teacher/Subject Area Jennifer Brooks Coach so they can develop proficiency in selecting appropriate software programs for their children, and also learn to use internet resources such as the DOE website. Our Assembly Programs, Field Day and our Arts Festival Day are also used to promote and showcase our students' many gifts and talents so parents can bask in their children's achievement. Translation services at our programs are usually provided by bilingual speaking teachers on our staff. We also make use of translation services provided by the Translation Department of the DOE. Yvette Donald 19 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 0  Jazmaine Calizaire Coach Jaclyn McManus School Counselor Stacy Easton Not Yet Hired 1/1/01 Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member 1/1/01 Other Dr. Thomas McBryde Jr. Other Other 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 Catherine Ettkins 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 19K149 School Name: P. S.149 Superintendent: Dr. T. McBryde, The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Dona X X X White Parent Coordinator yes yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Our data has informed us that we have families that speak or write in the following languages: Arabic, Belarus, Bengali, French, Haitian/Creole, English, Spanish, Urdu. The breakdown is the following: Arabic - 19, Belarus, French, Haitian/Creole, and Urdu - 1 each, Bengali - 6, English - 531, Spanish - 77. We rely on the HLS to inform us of the language used at home. It is then followed up by the ENL teacher who then assess the student's needs and follows up with a parent meeting. With the use of interpretation, she questions the parents and what the home preferences are. This information is then placed ion the emergency card and the teacher is 2  informed for instructional purposes. The parent coordinator is then informed so she then can reach out to the parent using translated messages. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 531 77 19 6 1 1 1 1 English Spanish Arabic Bengali French Haitian/Creole Urdu Belarus 83.36 12.09 2.98 .94 .16 .16 .16 .16 526 79 22 6 1 1 1 1 82.57 12.4 3.45 .94 .16 .16 .16 .16 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. There are no other languages spoken. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. 1. No School/Half Days 2. Student Blue Cards 3. Parent Handbook Brochure 1. 7 school days prior to the date 1. Letters have been sent to office of closure or half day 2. Given at registration or need updating. of translation to be translated into needed languages and are back packed home to parents. 3  3. Given at time of registration, 2. These have been translated P/T conferences, and Meet the staff night in September into: Arabic, Bengali, Hatian/Creole, and Spanish Parent Workshops 2 weeks prior to workshop date Student Performances 2 weeks prior to performance Grade Team Newsletter Once Monthly 3. These have also bween translated in the above mentioned languages. Letters have been sent to office of translation to be translated into needed languages and are back packed home to parents. Google translator and office of translation We will use Google Translator in needed languages 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Parent Teacher Conference Sept., Nov., March, May ENL Meetings On Going Parent/Teacher conference as needed On going depending on need CookShop for Parents 8 sessions (TBD) provide interpretation service(s)? Oral Translators as needed, school staff, and consultants as needed. Audio translation and consultants as needed. Audio translators, school staff, and consultants as needed. Audio translators, school staff, and consultants as needed. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We have established that certain individuals, such as our consultants, who speak outer than English, will be utilized to contact those families via the phone and inform parents of the situation. For example, staff will contact in the following languages: Spanish, Arabic, French, and Bengali. For other languages, staff will use audio translations electronically.: Haitian Creole, Urdu, Belarus. We will also make use of the Language Line made available through the DOE. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure 4  Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Professional development will be held for the staff by the our ENL teacher as well as the Principal during the extended Monday time. The ENL teacher will inform the staff on the language needs and challenges of our newly arrived school families. She will instruct the staff on instructional strategies to be used in the classroom. The Principal will have ongoing sessions with the staff informing them of: a) staff members that are available for face to face translations during meetings with parents and how they can utilize electronic translations. For example: Google Translator and Cell phone translation. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Those parents who need, will have face to face meetings arranged by the ENL teacher. She will hold small group meetings where she and those staff members who speak a second language will inform parents of services that are available to them. When needed, the school will arrange, in advance, to have a translator(s) present from the "The Big Word". Any printed information will be available in needed languages to assist parents in contacting needed agencies and services. The school will make available a multi-lingual poster provided by the translation unit with various sources of contacts for students' needs. Brochures have been placed in various locations for parents to take and read: main office, library, Parent Coordinator"s office. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? During these meetings, parents are offered a one on one with a staff member, and translator, and asked about school notifications, student services, and any family assistance needed. Also, they are asked to to offer any suggestions of how we can improve our communication and outreach. The staff member has a survey/questioner that they offer to complete for the parent. These are then reviewed by the Principal, administrators, and our ENL teacher. We then sort through the suggestions and begin to implement any as possible. One such suggestion that has been implemented is the electronic translation. We use cell phone and Google translator. 5 
