2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 32K151 School Name: P.S. 151 LYNDON B. JOHNSON Principal: JAYNE HUNT 2018-19 SCEP-P 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 9: Title I Program Information Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-P 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Lyndon Baines Johnson Elementary 32K151 333200010151 School Number (DBN): Pre-Kindergarten through Fifth Grades 763 Knickerbocker Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11207 718-326-6360 718-326-6364 Phone Number: Jayne M. Hunt Fax: JHunt2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Jayne M. Hunt Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Deborah Sherman Elizabeth Rodriguez Veronica Nunez-Baret Crystal Rodriguez Not Applicable Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Not Applicable Geographical District: 32 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Sheila Gorski Superintendent: 797 Bushwick Avenue, Room 300, Brooklyn, NY 11221 SGorski@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-574-1100 Phone Number: 718-574-1254 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Brooklyn North District 32 FSC: Executive Director: Bernadette Fitzgerald 2018-19 SCEP-P 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, NY 11201 BFitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-3954 Phone Number: 718 935-2382 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-P 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Jayne M. Hunt Deborah Sherman ElizabethRodriguez Isabel Harinarain CrystalRodriguez Not Applicable Not Applicable Not Applicable Veronica Nunez-Baret Vanessa Colon CherBeauchamp *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Chair Person /Teacher UFT Member/ Teacher UFT Member/ Parent 2018-19 SCEP-P 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Crystal Rodriguez CynaraBoykin Zebulon Miletsky Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ DC 37 Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-P 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 SCEP-P 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: 2018-19 SCEP-P 8  Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you 2018-19 SCEP-P 9  monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-P 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission is to create a hands-on, thematic-based learning environment where all students feel safe, respected, and encouraged to maximize their strengths, as they strive towards academic excellence. We are committed to the sustainable development of collaborative, innovative, bilingual, bi-literate and multicultural citizens in our global community. In PS 151K, students engage in challenging learning opportunities where they can successfully implement their critical thinking, creativity and communication skills. We aim to promote healthy relationships amongst everyone in our school community. Our school strengthens respect for community by involving children's extended families, members of the neighborhood and the broader community in school activities. Our varied curricula empowers students to be problem solvers who are responsible and respectful in an intellectual risk-free environment. Our faculty recognizes that children are unique learners and, therefore, our teaching styles encompass all modes of learning. We infuse into the core curriculum the specialty areas of art, music, dance/movement, storytelling, drama, computer technology, and physical education. Our philosophy is that our students' will achieve academic excellence in all of their academic pursuits. As they advance together in academic grades and continue to improve their discussion and writing skills across all disciplines, our students will attain a multicultural understanding and appreciation for diverse cultures represented in our local and global society. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 151K, the Lyndon Baines Johnson Elementary School, is located in the neighborhood of Bushwick, Brooklyn. Our community is comprised of Hispanic-Americans, African-Americans and immigrants from the Caribbean, Central America and Asian countries such as Yemen and the Philippines. As of June 27, 2018 P.S. 151K's student body includes 309 Pre-Kindergarten through Grade 5 students of which, 37% are English Language Learners, 20% are Students with Disabilities, and 98.1% receive free lunch. Boys account for 51% of students enrolled and girls account for 49%. The average attendance rate for the school year 2017-18 was 92.6%, as compared to the previous school year rate of 91.8%. Our instructional philosophy, based on our belief in “Educate, Excel, Empower,” is designed to leverage our strength in science instruction, employing a hands-on/inquiry-based approach to learning. Our school wide instructional focus is to strengthen students' use of evidence in writing and discussion, across all disciplines to promote college and career readiness, through our rigorous dual language program. Our dual language program will now be implemented in grades Pre-Kindergarten through third grades. The model of instruction is the 50-50 model, in which students are receiving instruction in both languages daily. We will continue our partnership with Cornell University to provide our parents a series of nutrition and health workshops. In our efforts to support healthy living in our community, we will continue to partner with New York City (NYC) Department of Health & Mental Hygiene in their healthy school initiatives. As a result, our wellness council will continue our efforts to promote healthy eating and active living for our students, staff members, and families. Our parent coordinator, parent association (PA) president and principal will continue to work collaboratively in scheduling events to address healthy living and the awareness of preventive care. Our school collaborates with community based organizations to provide a wide-range of health services to families, including free mammogram screening and other health related issues. We are continuing our partnerships with the ASPIRA of New York Organization and the Learning through an Expanded Arts Program (LEAP). Both programs are supporting our students by promoting and empowering young intellectual and cultural leaders, while providing quality educational arts to enhance artistic inquiry, collaboration, and critical thinking skills. 2018-19 SCEP-P 11  Through the State Improvement Cohort 7 (SIG-7) Grant, we will continue to expand our music and arts program with the Bronx Arts Ensemble, in the afterschool program. Students will have opportunities to learn instrumental music. Our school will provide on-site professional development for teachers to support curriculum and instruction, with an emphasis on best instructional practices to meet the needs of our English Language Learners (ELLs) and Students with Disabilities (SWDs). Additionally, through this grant, we will implement the Read Alliance Program to support our non-readers in Kindergarten, grade one and grade two. In the 2018-19 school year, we will begin our collaboration with the United Federation of Teachers (UFT) Teacher Center. While this partnership commenced with the SIG-7 funding, the UFT Teacher Center will be offering on-site professional development to our teachers and to the teachers within our school District 32. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We recognize that there are multiple pathways to educate our Students with Disabilities (SWDs) and English Language Learners (ELLs). Therefore, we will continue with a number of special initiatives this academic school year that will support the manner in which our SWDs and ELLs learn from the 2016-17 and 2017-18 school years. We support the Arts through a special collaboration with The Bronx Arts Ensemble Instrumental and Theater Programs. We offer special initiatives for fitness and wellness through our Dancing, Volleyball and Basketball after school and Swim for Life for our second grade students. To further support our ELLs in grades Kindergarten (K) - 2 we have partnered with the Read Alliance Program. To support our ELLs in grades 3-5, we host a Reader’s Café after school program. This program will continue with the support of our community base organization ASPIRA. All of our ELLs have access to the Achieve 3000 / Smarty Ants literacy software to enhance their phonics through reading comprehension independently and guided time. To target the needs of our young males in grades 1-5, we have partnered with the Boy Scouts of America After school Program. Lastly, we have partnered with Music and the Brain and School of Rock to ensure the musical instruction in piano/keyboarding for our students in Pre-Kindergarten through Second Grades and Guitar instruction for our students in Third through Fifth Grades. As of our 2017-18 New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT) scores of our current students in grades first through fourth, the level of proficiency from entering is 4%, emerging is 15%, transitioning is 31%, expanding is 38%, and commanding is 12% (which tested out in 2018 but will continue to receive support pursuant to the guidelines.). Our ELLs consisted of the following maternal language speakers: 1% Haitian, 5% Arabic, 1% Polish, 1% Philippine, and 92% Spanish speaking. While the dominant language is Spanish, children are arriving from a variety of Spanish speaking countries / regions, such as Honduras, Mexico, Peru, Argentina, the Dominican Republic and Puerto Rico, US. Given this diversity, our school strives to address both the linguistic and cultural needs of the children and their families. We have five integrated collaborative teaching (ICT) classes in grades one to five, (one per grade). The students present with diverse learning needs, based on their disabilities, including speech, autism, emotional, physical, and learning. are 20% of our total Pre-Kindergarten to fifth grade student population. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The element of the Framework for Great Schools in which our school has made the most growth during the 2017-18 school year is Rigorous Instruction. The 2017-18 NYS exam report for ELA reveals the following data:  Grade 3 Levels 2 36%; Level 3 36%  Grade 4 Levels 2 38%; Levels 3 & 4 24% 2018-19 SCEP-P 12   Grade 5 Levels 2 56%; Level 3 9% The 2017-18 NYS exam report for math reveals the following data:  Grade 3 Levels 2 38%; Levels 3 & 4 30%  Grade 4 Levels 2 36%; Levels 3 & 4 32%  Grade 5 Levels 2 38%; Level 3 24%. Additionally, the 2017-18 School Quality Guide (online edition) reveals the following data: The Framework Element score for 2017-18 for Rigorous Instruction was 3.92, reflecting an increase from the previous year (3.90) and also an increase from 2016-17 (2.73). The Survey Element score for 2017-18 Rigorous Instruction was 3.70, reflecting an increase from the previous year (3.61). The Framework for Great Schools element that will be our focus for 2018-19 will be Collaborative Teachers. The 2017-18 School Quality guide (online edition) reveals the following data: The Survey Element score for Collaborative Teachers was 3.33, reflecting a decline from the previous year (3.61) and also a decline from 2016-17 (4.46). In order to ensure our continued efforts towards improved rigorous instruction outcomes for our students, it is essential that our teacher teams collaborate effectively to plan and implement rigorous curriculum with the necessary scaffolds and supports to meet the diverse learning needs of all of our students, including ELLs and SWDs. 2018-19 SCEP-P 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 32K151 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 305 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 16 16 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 9 4 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) 1 School Composition (2017-18) 95.0% % Attendance Rate 93.1% % Reduced Lunch 29.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 80.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 5.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.05 0% 7% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 23.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 79% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Yes N/A 54 54 92.6% 2.0% 18.4% 14.1% 0.7% 0.0% 2 0% 4.1 29.7% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A YSH NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-P 14  2018-19 SCEP-P 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school's strengths relative to this Framework element are the following: Improved student data for ELA and math, based on the spring 2018 report. The 2017-18 NYS exam report for ELA reveals the following data:  Grade 3 Levels 2 36%; Level 3 36%  Grade 4 Levels 2 38%; Levels 3 & 4 24%  Grade 5 Levels 2 56%; Level 3 9% The 2017-18 NYS exam report for math reveals the following data:  Grade 3 Levels 2 38%; Levels 3 & 4 30%  Grade 4 Levels 2 36%; Levels 3 & 4 32%  Grade 5 Levels 2 38%; Level 3 24%. 2018-19 SCEP-P 16  Our priority need is to ensure an increase in the percentage of students achieving proficiency levels 3 and 4 in both ELA and math. The 2018 NYS ELA examination results will be included when the data is available. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of all grades 3, 4, 5 teachers planning for and implementing rigorous, NYSLS-aligned unit and daily lessons in ELA, at least 30% of students in grades 3, 4, 5, will achieve level 3 or 4 literacy proficiency, as measured by the spring 2019 state ELA exam. QR 1.1 and 1.2/DTSDE 3.3. 2018-19 SCEP-P 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Research-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change: ● On-site professional development workshops for teachers, teacher teams, etc. by Amplfy/CKLA, Literacy Support Service (TC Writing); Generation Ready for Math and Technology a minimum of two times per school year for half- and or full-day planning (provided by SIG-7 funding) November 2018 - June 2018 All Classroom Teachers and Coaches Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Classroom & Enrichment Teachers, Support Personnel, Grade Facilitators, Coaches, Administrators Teachers, Coaches ● School leaders will monitor the effectiveness of all action plan activities and teacher performance through Advance system of evaluation and support. School leaders will make adjustments as necessary. ● Select teachers will meet before and/or after school to unit and lesson plan for the Read Alliance, and Literacy programs. These meeting times will include time to assess and examine student work, to backward map to refine unit and lesson plans for before / after school and day school instruction. (provided by SIG-7 funding) Administrators Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH): Afterschool Teachers ● Teachers will be provided on-site professional development by SIG-7 approved consultants, Generation Ready for Technology support, Literacy Support Systems for Teachers College Writing support, and other consultants such as Goldmansour & Rutherford for support with all curriculum to provide access to English Language Learners (ELL) and student with disabilities (SWD) 2018-19 SCEP-P 18  Teachers , Coaches Classroom & Enrichment Teachers, Support Personnel, Grade Facilitators, Coaches, Administrators Research-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change: Teachers ● The school will implement the Core Knowledge Language Arts and TC’s Writing Program that are NYSLS aligned curriculum across all subjects and disciplines. September 2018 – June 2019 Classroom & Enrichment Teachers, Support Personnel, Grade Facilitators, Administrators ● Select teachers will attend the Curriculum Professional Development (PD), English as a New Language (ENL) PD, etc. Those teachers will meet, share and turn-key to their grade level colleagues to ensure continuity and coherence across classrooms. ● Teacher teams will meet twice monthly to discuss and examine student work to backward map to refine unit and lesson plans. ● Select teacher-teams will meet after school to assess and examine student work, to backward map to refine unit and lesson plans for afterschool and day school instruction. Grade Facilitators Daily on-going Grade Level Team Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 ● Select teachers will meet before and/or after school to unit and lesson plan for the Reader's Café, and Literacy programs. These meeting times will include time to assess and examine student work, to backward map to refine unit and lesson plans for before / after school and day school instruction. Grade Facilitators and Afterschool Teachers ● On-site professional development workshops for teachers, teacher teams, etc. by Amplfy/CKLA, Literacy Support Service (TC Writing); Generation Ready for Technology a minimum of two times per school year for half- and or full-day planning. Select Teachers ● School leaders will monitor the effectiveness of all action plan activities and teacher performance through Advance system of evaluation and support. School leaders will make adjustments as necessary. All Teachers 2018-19 SCEP-P 19 Classroom & Enrichment Teachers, Grade Facilitators, Administrators September through December 2018, January – March, April – June 2019 All Teachers Administrators ELLs, SWDs All students Students identified as requiring Tier 2 and 3 supports Classroom Teachers Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH): ● Teachers use the Core Knowledge Language Arts, TC’s Writing Program, EngageNY Math and Sounds in Motion, along with NYSLS aligned curriculum Tier 2 and Tier 3 strategies to address ELL and SWD students. ● Teacher Teams collaborate to set multiple entry points for sub-groups to expose students to grade level text using Webb’s Depth of Knowledge (DOK) and Universal Design for Learning (UDL) to post higher order questions to encourage student led-discussion by citing text evidence to support their arguments. ● Teachers use other data such as the Fountas & Pinnel Running Records, Project Based Assessment (PBA), iReady ELA and Math benchmark exams, 2018 NYS Item-Analysis and the Measure of Student Learning (MOSL) aligned Traits to inform grouping of students and adjust or realign unit and lesson plans. ● Teachers involved in the Literacy Support, Preventing Academic Failure (PAF) and Sounds in Motion Phonics Initiative are incorporating the skills and strategies during school-day student grouping. ● Teachers will continue to incorporate technological programs such as MyOn, Learning A-Z, and SmartyAnts Acheive 3000 affiliate programs ; and the use of technology into their classrooms and into their lesson plans. ● School leaders will monitor the effectiveness of all action plan activities and teacher performance through Advance system of evaluation and support. School leaders will make adjustments as necessary. Progress Monitoring and Assessment throughout the year: Teachers,  School wide reading level assessments will be tracked and monitored 4 times a year through the Teacher's College AssessmentPro database: September 2018, November 2018, March 2019 and June 2019. This data base assists the teacher in tracking and identifying reading comprehension and fluency growth and subgroups by ELL classification. The Grade Level Teacher Facilitator, Coaches, September 2018 - June 2019 Teachers, Grade Level Teacher facilitator, Coaches, Consultants and Administrators 2018-19 SCEP-P 20   benchmarks for student progress learning are provided by TC's F&P and Estrellita and grade level appropriate 1-4 rubric. School wide student performance assessments in ELA will be tracked and monitored 4 times a year in September 2018, January 2019, March 2019 and June 2019. The CKLA, TC Writer's Workshop and EngageNY Math Curriculum, include NYSLS aligned performance based assessment to monitor student learning. These assessments will be gathered on the NYSLS checklist to ascertain what standards have been mastered and provide students with the knowledge of the academic strengths as well as challenges. The data will be entered onto the school's googledocs data spreadsheets for teachers and administration to analyze up to date academic and personal behavioral information. Teachers and Administration will use ClassDojo to communicate with parents about their child's academic and personal behavioral information; for our last marking period, all data will be entered through the New York City's STARS Classroom database reporting system.  Unit Plans, Curriculum (Core Knowledge Language Arts, TC Writer's, EngageNY Math and teacher made) Performance Based Assessments, Rubrics and student-friendly checklists, student work products, student portfolios, student-led conversations and goal checklists, agendas and lesson plans provided during administrative observations. Activities that address the Framework for Great Schools’ element of Trust : All Groups and school staff, ● Teacher representatives across school committees initiate communication with Administration to suggest various types of educational opportunities for all constituents. Teachers, ● The Principal provides open door policy where all constituents are welcomed and confidentiality is maintained. ● The Principal actively communicates with staff on upcoming events and professional learning opportunities through weekly newsletter to teachers and staff, internal email and one-to-one conversations. ● Parents receive weekly announcements via fliers and the ClassDojo App ● Student Council will take part in the mediation of student issues; voice their concerns and provide input on school-wide events, etc. ● The Principal will collaborate with Brooklyn North Field Support Centers with inter-school collaborations and with professional Parents and Guardians, Fifth Grade Students, all / select Teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Teachers, and Administrators, BN FSC and Consultants / community based organizations. 2018-19 SCEP-P 21  development opportunities for groups and individual teachers in English as a New Language , Math, Science, Arts, etc. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will engage parents and families in workshops and activities sponsored by our Parent coordinator, teachers, coaches, Office of School Health, etc. Parent workshops and activities will include but not be limited to: Open School Parent orientation for grades Pre-K through 5th grades; Town Hall safety meeting; English as a new language; Breakfast with the principal; Wellness workshops; Online based literacy programs such as Myon, SmartyAnts, etc; FDNY Fire Safety; Holiday Shows; NYS Exam expectations; homework help; nutrition workshops; etc. The timeline for these activities will be monthly with some weekly workshops commencing September 2018 though June 2019. The key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight will be our Parent coordinator, guidance counselor, teachers, LEAP, ASPIRA and other community based organization and school leaders. Communication to families by means of newsletters and workshops are frequent and designed to provide support and guidance towards a pathway for college and career readiness for students. Math and science newsletters inform families about curricular content and provide opportunities for them to build increased excitement for their children. These monthly and bi-monthly periodicals are sent by the Principal and classroom teachers. Other newsletters communicated approaches to help children become self-motivated by pointing to the future, moving on from mistakes, and celebrating hard work. Workshops facilitated by the parent coordinator to support teachers emphasis on the skills addressing literacy and healthy nutrition. All communication is available in both English and Spanish. Parents will receive communication via backpacked handouts, and electronically using the ClassDojo App as soon as September 2018 and continuing every month through to June 2019. Strategies to increase parent involvement and engagement. ● Teachers communicate with parents back-packed hand outs, via ClassDojo App, and telephone calls during the allotted weekly Parent Engagement period; ● The Parent Coordinator with select Teachers and/or Administrator conduct monthly academic professional development and theme-night sessions. ● Provide parent workshops aligned with the New York state learning standards (NYSLS) for their child’s grade. ● Provide parent workshops and informational sessions on the afterschool program expectations and student progress and how they are aligned with the New York state learning standards (NYSLS) for their child’s grade. ● Select parents will be part of the various museum exhibits, field trips and workshops that support the content, historical time period, etc., students are learning in Math, Science, Art and Social Studies as part of our NYSLS CKLA curriculum. As a result, Parents will be able to support our students through discussion and be knowledgeable of student expectations and ways Parents can support their child academically and social-emotionally. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-P 22  Teacher per diem (approximately 4 substitute teachers are hired per month) to provide coverage for classroom teachers for parent workshops during the school day 9-11 am and to adjust teacher schedules to accommodate for full-day common planning time, inter-visitations, and outside professional development workshops provided by District 75, the department of English Language Learners, Teacher's College, and our Borough Field Support Center. Teacher per session to have teachers attend after-school hour professional development and to provide parents workshop during evening hours of 3-5 pm, 6-8 pm and the time of parent-teacher conferences. Upon return from professional development opportunities, teaches meet with their grade level teams to share learning, build capacity,and reflect on the results of the implementation of the newly learned teaching practices. Resources to be purchased are additional teacher manuals for Core Knowledge Language Arts, EngageNY Eureka Math, Preventive Academic Failure, Sounds in Motion, Explode the Code; Teacher's College Writing Bundles and Fountas & Pinnel running records in Spanish; Estrellita Spanish Phonics for our Dual Language Students; NYSESLAT student practice bundles, test preparation materials for our students in grades two through five from iReady in the areas of literacy and mathematics and student trade books that support the Recipe for Reading, Academic Support and Reader's Café program, to mention a few. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Our midpoint benchmark: By February 2019, as a result of all grades 3, 4, and 5 teachers planning for and implementing rigorous, NYSLS-aligned unit and daily lessons in ELA, 15% of students in grades 3, 4 and 5 will achieve at least a level 3 or 4 literacy proficiency, as measured by the midyear 2019 IReady ELA exam. QR 1.2 and 1.2/DTSDE 3.3 To ensure that progress monitoring occurs between the benchmark dates, select teachers will attend various professional development opportunities a minimum of two (2) times a year in Writer’s Workshop Program and/or Individual Educational Plan (IEP) NYSLS aligned writing PD; and the ENL academic support PD and/or Read Alliance PD. These PDs are designed to support our teachers in the implementation of day-to-day curriculum and assess student's knowledge of content taught and on how to identify tiers 2 and 3 strategies for students while ensuring students gain access to the curriculum. Administrators will meet with teachers bi-monthly to support teachers setting benchmarks for all students and with student portfolios. Administrators will be providing inquiry and data analysis support with the support of our Brooklyn North Field Support Centers (BN FSC). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 SCEP-P 23  The instrument of measure that will be used to assess progress will be the midyear 2019 IReady ELA exam. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Our strength as indicated by the 2017 Quality Review, "Structures are in place to maintain a culture of mutual trust and positive attitudes created through the adoption of a Positive Behavior Interventions and Supports (PBIS) curriculum. Additionally, the school community strategically aligns professional development with consultants and teacher leaders, family outreach, and student learning experiences and supports." We will continue to implement the Positive Behavior Intervention & Support (PBIS) system to improve the culture of social-emotional learning (SEL) expectations for all students. The teachers provide weekly thematic SEL instruction and morning meetings during the designated SEL period. Each week, a student of the week is acknowledged for demonstrating the highlighted behavior. Additionally, the guidance counselor and parent coordinator assists with addressing student and family concerns regarding social emotional issues. As a result, student online occurrence report have decreased; teacher teams and parents are informed of student behavior and are working towards building sustained relationships to ensure high expectations and feedback is consistently provided and supported by the whole school community. The School Quality Snapshot reflects that 85% of the teachers feel that order and discipline are maintained at this school. To increase teacher pedagogy in SEL, classroom teachers will engage in the book study around 2018-19 SCEP-P 25  "Mindset." The PBIS Matrix is displayed throughout the building to support, guide and improve student SEL to positively impact student academic achievement. Our priority need is to address student level 2 infraction as reported in our 2017-18 OORS report. We have learned that student incidents increased in the Spring months by 3 incidents per month in comparison to 2 incidents total within the first 5 months. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of 100% of students participating in and benefiting from social-emotional supportive school-wide programs and activities, such as PBIS (Positive behavior Intervention Systems), there will be at least a 10 % decrease in the number of suspensions/incidents, as measured by June 2019 OORS reports, compared to the number of suspensions/incidents in OORS reports during 2017-2018. QR 1.4/DTSDE 5.3. 2018-19 SCEP-P 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Research-based instructional programs , professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change All Students, SWDs, ELLs, and Tiers 2 and 3 students September 2018 - June 2019 ● The entire school staff will engage in professional learning sessions to become familiarized with the school-wide Positive Behavior Intervention & Supports (PBIS) Matrix, NYCDOE PBIS-Bully Prevention, Jump-Start program, Sanford Harmony Program, Brain Power Teachers and paraprofessionals ● The PBIS Tiers 2 and 3 members will engage in professional learning sessions to collaborate to identify next steps and resources to create and implement visual aids, schedules, etc. for individual students as necessary.  Teachers and Paraprofessionals will attend appropriate workshops provided by our BN FSC, District 75, etc.  Classroom Teachers will engage in monthly book study  workshops around the Mindset Book. Select teachers and paraprofessionals (Teaching Assistants) will meet before and/or after school to create and modify academic and behavior plans for all students identified as needing Tier 3 Supports, using the Pre-Referral Intervention Manual (PRIM) and Behavior Intervention Manual. These meeting times will include time to assess and examine student behavior and academic work, to backward map to refine plans.  Teachers will be provided on-site professional Teachers development by Special Education School Improvement Speciliast (SESIS) for support with all curriculum to provide access to student with disabilities (SWD) Classroom Teachers and Paraprofessionals Teachers, Coaches, Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator, Teaching Assistants, Support Service Providers and Administrators 2018-19 SCEP-P 27  November 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 – June 2019 Administration and BN FSC PBIS Tiers 2 and 3 Members, School Psychologist, Social Worker, Guidance Counselor, Student Support Providers, Teachers, paraprofessionals and Administrators Classroom Teachers and Coaches Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities (SWDs), English language learners (ELLs), and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Tiers 2 and 3 Students Teachers, guidance counselor and paraprofessionals Tiers 2 and 3 students To engage all staff members on supporting students in the social-emotional and academic behaviors adaptations and modifications we will use the Check-In and Check-Out Sheets, Visual Aids, Pre-Referral Intervention Manual (PRIM), Anecdotal, PBIS ClassDojo points, PBIS Celebration, and Child Study Referral and Functional Assessment Interview Tool (FAIT) Tools and ClassDojo App.. To ensure that all students have access to the curriculum, teachers will provide multiple entry points and scaffold tasks that may include graphic organizers, as well as translated supports such as ipads, online websites for students to access stories, literature, science, math, etc. in their maternal language and in English to increase language development and increase rich academic vocabulary. Teachers will be provided on-site professional development by SIG-7 approved consultants, Generation Ready for Math & Technology support, Literacy Support Systems for Teacher's College Writing support, and consultants such as Goldmansour & Rutherford for support with all curriculum to provide access to English Language Learners (ELL) and student with disabilities (SWD) Classroom Teachers and Coaches November 2018 - June 2019 Teachers, Coaches, Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator, Teaching Assistants, Support Service Providers and Administrators PBIS Tiers 1, 2 and 3 Members, Parent Coordinator, Teachers, Parent Association, paraprofessionals and Administrators Activities that address the Framework for Great Schools’ element of Trust Parents and Families September 2018 – June 2019 ● Create and maintain a trusting environment and develop stronger family-community relationships. Select Students, tier 2 and 3 students 2018-19 SCEP-P 28  ● Teachers and Parents are included in the Student of the Week and Month and PBIS Celebrations and year end music recitals and school-wide end of year celebrations. ● Paraprofessionals (Teaching Assistants) create informal behavior plans for select Tiers 2 and 3 students to provide parents as a guide of the interventions provided to their students in school that can be replicated by the parents/guardians at home. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will continue to engage parents/families and support their understanding of our school's Positive Behavior Interventions and Supports (PBIS) philosophy as a form of our supportive environment to support the whole child. Structures are in place to maintain a culture of mutual trust and positive attitudes created through the adoption of a PBIS curriculum. Additionally, the school community strategically aligns professional development with consultants and teacher leaders, family outreach, and student learning experiences and supports. School members and Parents are provided with the PBIS handbook and monthly newsletters on how to support students academic and personal behaviors at home. The parent coordinator conducts a minimum of two (2) parent workshops a month ranging from academic, healthy eating, personal behaviors, stress and social emotional learning to support their understanding of supportive environment. Our counselor, teachers and paraprofessionals are part of our PBIS Tier 1 committee that work in tandem for the implementation of our PBIS monthly activities. Strategies to increase parent involvement and engagement ● Teachers and school leaders communicate with parents via e-mail, texts, and telephone calls during the allotted weekly Parent Engagement period ● Parent Coordinator with select Teachers and/or Administrators conduct bi-monthly academic professional development sessions. ● Teachers will communicate with our Parent Association (PA) monthly to acknowledge the parent that has worked collaboratively and/or supported class instruction, teachers, etc. during the monthly PA evening meetings / activity events. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher per diem to provide coverage for classroom teachers for parent workshops during the school day 9-11 am. Teacher per session to have teachers attend after-school hour professional development and to provide parents workshop during evening hours of 6-8 pm. 2018-19 SCEP-P 29  The cost of incidentals and material involved in the evening events for Parents and Family Members. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, as a result of 100% of students participating in and benefiting from social-emotional supportive school-wide programs and activities, such as PBIS (Positive Behavior Intervention Systems), there will be at least a 5 % decrease in the number of suspensions/incidents, as measured by OORS reports for the period of September 2018 to February 2019, compared to OORS reports for September 2017 to February 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The The various instruments of measure are: Student Surveys, agendas, Tiers 2 and 3 teacher assistant created behavior plans, OORS, STARS Classroom Personal and Academic report, student portfolio, and student work products. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed x 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school's strengths relative to this framework is vertical planning by the teachers. Based on the 2017-18 Principal Performance Observation written feedback, "these decisions are data-based and shared to inform discussions and make effective selections of strategies to be implemented during classroom instruction...Their most critical highlight is that they are able to learn and produce resources they can implement in their classrooms immediately." Our priority needs is based on the 2017 NYS Mathematics exam, fifty-three (53) percent of our third grade students score a level 1 mathematical proficiency rating. As a result, our priority need for the 2018-19 school year is to "streamline the amount of data teachers use and prioritize the data teachers should focus on to monitor and track student progress in mathematics in grade three (3) to use as data to inform effective revisions to lessons and academic tasks to meet students’ academic needs in the area of mathematics. Our school’s strengths are with the use of common assessments to measure student progress toward goals and to adjust curricula and instruction is emerging across grades and subjects. Assessment results allow for actionable feedback to students and teachers and are used to adjust curricula and instruction. As a strength 2017-18 survey online addition revealed that 95% of our teachers agreed that they are actively trying to improve their teaching. And in comparison to 89% of the City’s results. Additionally, 95% of our teachers indicated that they have opportunities to work productively with colleagues in their school on professional development. An increase of 7% over the city’s 88%. Our school’s need, based on the 2017-18 survey collaborative teachers’ is ensuring that all students have access to the rigorous curriculum. Based on the online edition, 85% of the teachers say that they modify instructional activities and 2018-19 SCEP-P 31  materials to meet the development needs and learning interests of all their students. It is below the District's (95%) and City's (96%) average distribution response. Additionally, 63% of our teachers say that teachers are eager to try new ideas. This percentage is below the District's (81%) and city's (78%) average distribution response. Our goal to address the needs identified above will be through providing our teachers targeted professional development. Our coaches and consultants will work collaboratively with teachers in provided effective instructional practices that provide multiple entry points, scaffolded tasks and engaging tasks to meet the needs of all students so that all students have access to the rigorous curriculum. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of all grades 3, 4 and 5 teacher teams collaboratively planning for and implementing rigorous, NYSLS-aligned unit and daily lessons in mathematics, incorporating data-driven multiple entry points, scaffolds, feedback, and rubrics, 30% of students in grades 3, 4, and 5 will increase from a level 1 to a level 2 mathematical proficiency, as measured by the spring 2019 state math exam. QR 4.2/DTSDE 4.2 2018-19 SCEP-P 32  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Research-based instructional programs , professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change All Teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Grade level teachers, Grade Facilitators, Coaches, and Administrators . ● Support professional learning communities using videos, and off-site professional development through the office of ELL, District 75, etc. ● Use double prep periods, PD Mondays, and Collaboration Tuesdays to meet with the teachers to provide targeted PD on Looking at Student Work (LASW) protocol and creating strategies to incorporated in instructional planning ● Select teacher teams will meet afterschool to assess and examine student work, to backward map to refine unit and lesson plans for afterschool and day school instruction. ● Select teachers will meet before and/or after school to unit and lesson plan for the Math program. These meeting times will include time to assess and examine student work, to backward map to refine unit and lesson plans for before / after school and day school instruction. ● Teachers will be provided on-site professional development by SIG-7 approved consultants, Generation Ready for Math & Technology support, Literacy Support Systems for Teacher's College Writing support, and Goldmansour & Rutherford for support with all curriculum to provide access to English Language Learners (ELL) and student with disabilities (SWD) Grade level teacher teams Grade facilitators and teacher teams / committees Teachers of SWD and ELL subgroups. Grade level teachers, Grade Facilitators, Coaches, Consultants, and Administrators . Afterschool Teachers October 2018 – June 2019 Classroom Teachers and Coaches November 2018 – June 2019 2018-19 SCEP-P 33 Coaches, Grade Level Teacher-Facilitators, Pupil Support Team Members, consultants and Administrators. September 2018- June 2019 Coaches, Grade Level Facilitators, and Administrators Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). All classroom teachers September 2018 – June 2019 ● There will be four (4) sessions of teachers presenting data (inquiry) results on student progress; ● There were will be monthly vertical planning by grade facilitators ● There will be on-site peer visitations and instructional demonstrations by model teachers such as the ENL, Speech and Academic Intervention Service (AIS/SETSS) providers ● There will be on-site UFT Teacher center Literacy and Math Coaches to assist with providing teachers with on-site professional development Grade level facilitators Select Teachers and Teachers of SWD and ELL subgroups The teachers use a variety of data to help make school wide decisions and monitor and track student progress. Some data sources used are NYSED English Language Arts, math and science tests, Fountas and Pinnell reading levels, MyOn data, iready data for benchmark tests, performance tasks, and curriculum unit tests. The school shares the analysis with teachers to assist them with planning and identifying interventions for students. This analysis sheet provides information on what needs to be created for targeted interventions for individual and groups of students. The school is introducing the use of googledocs to manage the data from the various sources and to better identify how they can use their data more strategically to accelerate student learning. Teachers, Teachers of SWDs and ELL subgroups, Coaches, Grade Facilitators, coaches,   In September, December and April Teachers will submit the unit plan for the following quarter; In October 2018, Teachers graded student baseline assessments including running records and MOSL; In November 2018, Teachers work together looking at student work to identify the area(s) of need and select the lowest one-third of their students each to target for inquiry along with the CCLS' specified writing goals and teaching strategies to be used and support the inquiry process ; Teachers are expected to share their strategies and inquiry findings in December 2018; February 2019; April 2019 and June 2019 during the Monday PD allotted time. During every Inquiry Presentations, teachers will provide student work for review along with the assessment guide (rubrics, scoring policy) as evidence of student growth and achievement, in accordance with New York City Inquiry Team Handbook. In February 2019, analyzing of student work and looking at student work (LASW) protocol will provide insight for teachers on the strategies that are positively impacting student achievement to ensure that a minimum of 75% of the students are mastering 80% of their mid-point goals in accordance to the rubrics, etc.. 2018-19 SCEP-P 34  Activities that address the Framework for Great Schools’ element of Trust ● After-school math program will be provided to select ELL students of grades 3 - 5 for mathematical writing from October 2018 through April 2019; ● AIS program will be created to target specific 3 rd - 5th grade students to increase their speaking, reading and writing practices in Mathematics from February 2019 through April 2019. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement October 2018 – June 2019 Select Students and select Students of SWDs and ELLS Subgroups A minimum of 5 Teachers for K-5 ELL program and 6 Teachers for 3-5 AIS ELA and Math program and Administrators How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will engage parents/families and support their understanding on how to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations via on-site workshops, meetings, one-to-one conferences and activities. Our parents will be provided weekly opportunities on Tuesdays to meet with their child's teacher in one-to-one conferences. Our school parent coordinator and parent engagement committees provide weekly workshops and monthly activities to work collaboratively. Communication to families by means of newsletters and workshops are frequent and designed to provide support and guidance towards a pathway for college and career readiness for students. Math and science newsletters inform families about curricular content and provide opportunities for them to build increased excitement for their children. Newsletters provided are on an array of topics such as academics, homework, and personal behaviors. Other newsletters communicated approaches to help children become self-motivated by pointing to the future, moving on from mistakes, and celebrating hard work. Workshops facilitated by the parent association and teachers emphasize skills addressing literacy and healthy nutrition. All communication is available in both English and Spanish. Newsletters and Parent Calendars are disseminated monthly via fliers that are backpacked and sent via the ClassDojo Application. Lastly, our Parent Coordinator works collaboratively with administration and our teachers on presenting workshops that are on academic topics such as homework, math, science, test preparation, social emotional learning, etc. Parent workshops occur twice a month during the school day and once a month in the evening hours. Strategies to increase parent involvement and engagement ● Parent communication during the allotted Parent Engagement and Parent Teacher Conferences ● Parent newsletters and calendar to notify parents of monthly events and how to work with their child in reading, math, science or homework. ● Parent Communication via the ClassDojo Application, in addition to backpacked flyers. ● Parents will participate in the afterschool program to experience the “See Your Child in Action” which affords the parents the close look at the experience of their children in the scaffold sessions Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-P 35  Teacher per diem to provide AIS for K-5 students in ELL program and AIS for 2-5 students in ELA, Math and Science (Grades 2, 3, & 4 ) from October 2018 (the latest) through, at least, May 2019. Teacher per diem to provide coverage for classroom teachers for parent workshops during the school day 9-11 am and Teacher per session to have teachers attend after-school hour professional development and to provide parents workshop during evening hours of 6-8 pm. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School X Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, as a result of all grades 3, 4, and 5 teacher teams collaboratively planning for and implementing rigorous, CCLS-aligned unit and daily lessons in mathematics, incorporating data-driven multiple entry points, scaffolds, feedback, and rubrics, 15% of students in grades 3, 4 and 5 will achieve at least levels 3 and 4 mathematical proficiency, as measured by the midyear 2019 IReady math exam. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure that will be used to measure progress will be the iReady Mathematics assessment. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 36  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve x critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school's strengths relative to this Framework element based on the summary below, referenced from the 2017 NYC Quality Review: Our strength were the use of common assessments to measure student progress toward goals and to adjust curricula and instruction is emerging across grades and subjects. All teachers have common planning time built into their schedules for opportunities to engage in structured, inquiry-based professional collaborations which often involve examining and analyzing student work. A “looking at student work” protocol form is used by teams of teachers to understand what student work reveals about their successes, challenges, and implications for instruction and learning. Teachers use this information to plan coherently and collaboratively so they meet the needs of a variety of learners through differentiation. The strategies identified by teachers are shared in lesson plans to make further adjustments to promote what is working and to identify and remedy potential student misconceptions. The priority need that will be addressed in this Framework will be to "support teachers with sustained effective pedagogical practices that encourage student discussion via questioning techniques, appropriate scaffolds, and consistent routines that promote student investment in the learning for a diversity of students across all classrooms," as indicated in the 2017-18 Principal Performance Observation (PPO) written feedback. 2018-19 SCEP-P 37  Our school’s strengths, based on the 2017-18 survey effective school leadership is that 84% of the teachers say that the principal participates in instructional planning with teams of teachers. In comparison of 88% in the district and 81% in the city. Our school’s need, based on the 2017-18 survey effective school leadership’ is where 89% of our teachers say that the principal sets clear expectations for teachers about implementing what they have learned in professional development. In comparison to the district’s 95%. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of school leaders’ effective implementation of Advance observations, feedback to teachers, and professional development, at least 90% of teachers will receive Effective and/or Highly Effective ratings in 3 of 3 of the following components: 3b (Questioning and Discussion Techniques); component 3c (Student Engagement); and component 3d (Using Assessment in Instruction), as measured by spring 2019 end of year Advance MOTP ratings. QR 4.1(b) /DTSDE 2.3 2018-19 SCEP-P 38  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff)  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Research-based instructional programs , professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change ● Strengthen planning and implementation of the NYSLS aligned Core Knowledge Language Arts, TC Writing, and EngageNY Eureka math Curriculum across all subjects and disciplines; ● Create opportunity for teachers to meet and look at student work (LASW) from the baseline MOSL assessments; create double prep periods once a month to provide teachers with targeted PD on LASW and creating strategies to incorporated in instructional planning; and ● Grade level planning during Tuesday PD time and vertical planning by grade facilitators once a month to strategically look at school-wide data (Google docs). ● Select teachers will attend the Curriculum PD, ENL PD, etc. Those teachers will meet, share and turn-key to their grade level colleagues to ensure continuity and coherence across classrooms. ● Teacher teams will meet twice monthly to discuss and examine student work to backward map to refine unit plans. ● Select teachers will meet before and/or after school to unit and lesson plan for Science, Literacy and Math curriculum. These meeting times will include time to assess and examine student work, to backward map to refine unit and lesson plans for before / after school and day school instruction. ● Teachers will be provided on-site professional development by SIG-7 approved consultants, Generation Ready for Math & Technology support, Literacy Support Systems for Teacher's College Writing support, and Goldmansour & Rutherford for support with all curriculum to provide access to English Language Learners (ELL) and student with disabilities (SWD) Teachers and Teaching Assistants October 2018 – June 2019 Coaches, Grade level Teachers, Grade Facilitators, and Administrators Coaches, Consultants, Teachers, Teacher Teams Select Teachers, Teacher facilitators, Coaches, Consultants Afterschool Teachers 2018-19 SCEP-P 39  Classroom Teachers and Coaches November 2018 – June 2019 Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). SWD and ELL subgroups September 2018 – June 2019 Coaches, Grade level Teachers, Grade Facilitators, Select Consultants and Administrators Teachers, Grade Facilitators and Pupil Support Team Members ● Targeted Professional Development for identified teachers to improve teaching practices. ● Adherence to a two-week feedback cycle to teachers using the Danielson Framework for Teaching (DFT). ● We are strengthening this practice by routinely providing teachers, including those new to the profession, with feedback via email and through one-on-one conferences. ● Teachers are furthering their practice through targeted professional development, collaborations, cycles of inquiry and inter-class visitations. Systems and structures will include: Unit Plans, quarterly inquiry presentations with student work products, student baseline and mid-line curriculum and iReady and Skedula (datacation) assessments-data, rubrics and student friendly checklists, and administrative observation reports with lesson plans and student work products. Activities that address the Framework for Great Schools’ element of Trust Teacher teams and Coaches, September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Coaches, Grade Level Facilitators, and Administrators All student groups, Students identified as levels 1 or 2, all teachers and students Inquiry quarterly cycles: December 2018, February, April and June 2019 Teachers and Teaching Assistants September 2018 – June 2019 A minimum of 5 Teachers for K-5 ELL program and 6 Teachers for 3-5 AIS ELA and Math 2018-19 SCEP-P 40  ● Administration and staff collaborate with parents during parent engagement time to address the students’ academic and social emotional needs ● Administration will support teacher pedagogical growth through cycles of observations and feedback aligned with DFT. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement program and Administrators How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement to support their children at home through the following: Communication to families by means of newsletters and parent calendars on workshops are frequent and designed to provide support and guidance towards a pathway for college and career readiness for students. These newsletters and calendars of events are disseminated via paper and digitally via the ClassDojo application and are located on our main PS151K.org website. Administration and Teachers work collaboratively to provide parents a forum to question, voice concerns and learn with our children. Our monthly school leadership team (SLT) meetings are open to the public whereas parents are encouraged to attend to learn about the various aspects of our education. Lastly, our Parent Coordinator works collaboratively with administration and our teachers on presenting workshops that are on academic topics such as homework, math, science, test preparation, social emotional learning, etc. Parent workshops occur twice a month during the school day and once a month in the evening hours and during a part of the Parent Association meetings. Strategies to increase parent involvement and engagement commencing September 2018 through June 2019 are: ● Weekly Parent Engagement workshops that include parent-teacher communications via telephone, texts, emails and/or conferences. ● Bi-monthly academic and technology workshops to provide opportunities for parents to engage their children to further their learning on on-line programs ie MyOn, Achieve 3000, Smarty Ants, Zvern (Math), etc. and their child's/student's achievement. ● Select Parents (of grades Kindergarten, second and fifth grades) will be part of the Parent-Teacher Home Visit where Teachers go to meet with Parents to discuss student progress and expectations and ways Parents can support their child academically and social-emotionally ● Monthly parent themed events to take place between 5 p.m. to 7 p.m. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher per diem to provide coverage for classroom teachers for parent workshops during the school day 9-11 am and Teacher per session to have teachers attend after-school hour professional development and to provide parents workshop during evening hours of 6-8 pm. 2018-19 SCEP-P 41  Supervisor per diem of the after school programs and evening events. The purchase of student instructional materials for reading comprehension and writing; small group instruction on targeted CCLS; and of trade books. The purchase of materials to notify parents of events and academic progress. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, as a result of school leaders’ effective implementation of Advance observations, feedback to teachers, and professional development, at least 90% of teachers will receive at least 1 Effective and/or Highly Effective rating in at least 2 out of 3 of the following Danielson Framework for Teaching components: 3b (Questioning and Discussion Techniques); component 3c (Student Engagement); and component 3d (Using Assessment in Instruction), as measured by Advance Teacher Level MOTP Detail report for the period of September 2018 to February 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Instrument of measure that will be used to assess progress will be Advance. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 42  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their x SOP(s) Addressed high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school's strength relative to this Framework element, based on the 2017-18 PPO written feedback is: "You and your staff intentionally communicate high expectations to the entire school community via a myriad of approaches that encourage a culture of mutual accountability and ensure appropriate supports in efforts to increase student progress toward meeting the school’s expectations. You continuously monitor your modalities of communication to increase the school community’s understanding of your high expectations and to keep them informed of weekly and monthly events highlighted in your newsletter that is electronically mailed. Staff members are encouraged to contribute to the newsletter to create a variety of information and support a diversity of voices." According to our 2017-18 PCAR report, we need to increase parent participation in all school-wide events, including parent-teacher conference and Parent Association events as per the following PCAR data: parent participation at parent association meetings that are informational sessions about the parent association have approximately 4% attendance rate in comparison to events that are collaborated with the school and teacher activities / events such as NYS Science Exam Information session, Sports and Play Night, etc. which have an approximate 36% attendance rate. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 SCEP-P 43  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of all school staff’s efforts to ensure meaningful family engagement, there will be at least a 15% increase in parents’ participation in school-wide events, activities, communication systems, and meetings, as measured by the 2018-2019 Parent Coordinator Activity Report (PCAR), compared to the 2017-2018 Parent Coordinator Activity Report (PCAR). QR 3.4/DTSDE 6.2. 2018-19 SCEP-P 44  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Research-based instructional programs , professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change Parents and guardians ● To increase community involvement and to extend opportunities for parents to become career and college ready, we host English as a New Language (ENL) Program through the support of the ASPIRA organization. ● Our Guidance Counselor, Parent Association and Parent Coordinator collaborate and are highly invested in increasing parental involvement through monthly workshops, meetings, family night and student activities. ● We will partner with Cornell University and Mental Health of NY to provide our parents a series of Nutrition and Health Workshops. ● We will partner with NYC office of School wellness that supports parents physical activities for a healthier living. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) September 2018 – June 2019 Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Parent Association, Parent Events Committee, Community Based Organizations, and Administrator Administration, Parent Coordinators, Teachers, Parent Association, Guidance Counselor and Social Worker Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Parents October 2018 – June 2019 ● To enhance language access for all parents of English Language Learners (ELLs), the school has collaborated with the ASPIRA organization to offer weekly English as a New Language (ENL) courses. ● Tier 3 Members invite Parents of SWDs and students in need of tier 3 strategies as part of the PBIS Wraparound communication and implementation process. ● Teachers communicate with parents via phone texting, ClassDojo application, backpaced notifications and telephone calls during the designated weekly Parent Engagement period; and the Parent Coordinator with select Teachers and/or Administrator conduct bi-monthly academic professional development sessions and Parent Association provides monthly Evening events. 2018-19 SCEP-P 45  Strategies to increase parent involvement and engagement Parents ● Outreach to parents include monthly news calendars, backpacked flier highlighting special events (Dad's Events etc.), via ClassDojo, and texts. ● Parent Association Evening Events honoring Student of the Month ● Marking Periods Academic Celebrations and PBIS Ceremonies ● ASPIRA support and Mental Health PD to reduce daily stress and increase brain and body function. Activities that address the Framework for Great Schools’ element of Trust Parents ● Administration provides multiple means for parents to communicate and address concerns ● Extracurricular afterschool programs for students ● Day and Evening Programs for Parents, Parent Coordinator and Parent Association day and evening events 3b – Parent and Family Engagement September 2018 – June 2019 Administration, Parent Association, Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors, and CBOs September 2018 – June 2019 Administration, Parent Association, Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors and CBOs If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Cornell University Health and Nutrition workshop, Read Alliance Phonics and fluency, NYC Police Department 83rd Precinct on Bully Prevention, NYC Department of Transportation on Vision Zero; Fire Department of New York (FDNY) on Fire Safety; American Cancer Society - Scan Van on Breast Cancer awareness; and NYC Health Department on Stress. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher per diem to provide coverage for classroom teachers for parent workshops during the school day 9-11 am and Teacher per session to have teachers attend after-school hour professional development and to provide parents workshop during evening hours of 6-8 pm. The cost of incidentals and material involved in the evening events for Parents and Family Members. The cost for providing Parents workshops from outside organizations (Brain Power, NYC Dept Health, etc.). 2018-19 SCEP-P 46  The cost for Parents to attend exhibits located outside the school such as Science Exhibits, Arts and Theater for Cultural experiences, etc. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, as a result of all school staff’s efforts to ensure meaningful family engagement, there will be at least a 7.5% increase in parents’ participation in school-wide events, activities, communication systems, and meetings, as measured by the Parent Coordinator Activity Report (PCAR) for the period of September 2018-February 2019, compared to the Parent Coordinator Activity Report (PCAR) for September 2017-February 2018. School administration will monitor parental engagement/participation and alter parental engagement opportunities accordingly through the collection and examination of attendance sign-in sheets, agendas, emails/texts, parent surveys and feedback forms during every meeting. Parent Coordinator and Administration will assess growth of parent communication during our September 2018, November 2018, March 2019 and May 2019 parent benchmarked meetings. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher made Parent sign-in sheets, Parent Coordinator Parent sign-in sheets and PCAR reports, collection of completed parent surveys and feedback forms, school-wide Parent Conference Attendance Sheets, texts, texts via the ClassDojo Application, and emails to NYCDOE emails directly from parent personal emails will be the various of measurable instruments to track parent communication with our school staff members. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 47  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, Math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of approximately 50% of our fourth grade students participating in the extended learning time hands-on STEM lab technology and interactive program, there will be a 5% increase in the number of students achieving levels 3 and 4 science proficiency as measured by spring 2019 NYS Science exam as compared to the number of students achieving levels 3 and 4 on the 2018 NYS Science exam. Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? Voluntary X Compulsory If the ELT program is voluntary, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. Not applicable Part 3 – ELT Program Description The ELT program will be offered to all students eligible for Academic Intervention Services (AIS), with the goal of serving a minimum of fifty percent of AIS-eligible students. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program in a Priority School:  Integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging.  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduce risk for retention or drop out, and increase the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  Engage in outreach activities made to families. Extended Learning Time will be provided by our NYS certified teachers and through partnerships with community based organizations (CBO's) like Read Alliance to provide my Kindergarten, first and second grade students identified as struggling readers an after-school one-to-one tutoring program and homework program. I understand that early intervention is the key to addressing the issue of our current third - fifth graders from happening to the when they become our future third though fifth graders. In order to address our then current third through fourth graders and 2018-19 SCEP-P 48  understanding that older students need to be interested in order to stay for an academic afterschool program, I partnered with the Bronx Arts Ensemble to provide select (interested) third, fourth and fifth grader students music-band afterschool program that included homework/tutoring help. Furthermore, we will continue to offer afterschool sports program to include, but not be limited to, soccer, tennis, volleyball for select (interested) second through fifth graders; provided select second, third, fourth and fifth grade students with literacy and math afterschool assistance/tutoring with homework help. Every program includes all students, including ELLs and SWDs.) We will continue with the Science expanded learning time (ELT) will be designed to target our third and fourth grade students. The New York State (NYS) certified teachers of this program will use the New York City and State (NYC/NYS) Next Generation Science standards (NGSS) as a guide for teacher to assess students' learning and understanding, commensurate upon recipt of the SIG-7 funds. We will continue to offer my ELLs of grades Kindergarten through second grades (K-2) and all of the K-2 students reading below grade level, a one-to-one phonics tutoring and homework help after-school program, academic - homework support, board games, etc.; ELLs of grades third through fifth literacy support through the Read Alliance and Reader's Café afterschool program; Music, Band Ballroom Dance and Theater afterschool program for third through fifth graders with homework/tutoring help; and Running, Soccer and Volleyball, etc. afterschool program for select fourth and fifth graders with homework/tutoring help. Each program has and will commence with an parent orientation as to the expectations of the program and commitment with student attendance. Each program has and will have a culminating event that demonstrates student learning such as an Awards Ceremony (based on the academic assessments and NYSLS), music recital (addresses the Blueprint of the Music/Arts Standards), competition/game (addresses sportsmanship and physical and health education standards and skills), dance and theater show (addresses Blueprint of the Theater Arts and Speaking, Reading and Listening NYLS) and for science a student scientific method project (addressed by the NYC/NYS NGSS Scope and Sequence and Standards). Kindly reference Section 4: CEP Overview herein for the various programs I offer my students and families. My afterschool programs end at 5:30 p.m., extending our school day an additional three hours. Programs are provided by our NYC Teachers that are NYS certified. The Read Alliance Partnership and Bronx Arts Ensemble Partnership are commensurate upon receipt of the SIG-7 funds. I am hoping that NYS/NYC will provide my school adequate funding for the 2018-19 school year to keep the afterschool programs up and running, by paying my teachers per session, for approximately 30 weeks. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. 2. 3. Explain how you will evaluate the program to assess impact on student achievement. 1. Key Personnel responsible: CBO Read Alliance and my five NYS certified licensed teachers; CBO Bronx Arts Ensemble and my two NYS certified licensed teachers; 2018-19 SCEP-P 49  Literacy and Math Support - Adminstrators and my eight NYS Certified licensed teachers; Sports program - Administrators and and my eight NYS Certified licensed teachers; Reader's Café - Administrators and my three NYS Certified licensed teachers; Dancing - Administrators and my two NYS Certified licensed teachers; and Science - Administrators and my two NYS Certified licensed teachers. 2. Community Partners: Read Alliance, provides the materials that include phonic cards, readers, reading assessments and conducts the baseline, mid-line and final assessments and awards/certificates for our students in grades Kindergarten, first and second grades. (Commensurate upon receipt of SIG-7 funds.) Bronx Arts Ensemble, provides the theater scripts, music instruments, music paper, student costumes and final recitals and show for our students in second through fifth grades. (Commensurate upon receipt of SIG-7 funds.) ASPIRA, provides homework (academic) support and arts and crafts for our students in grades Pre-K through 5th grades. LEAP, provides academic intervention support for our students in grades three through 5 and multi-cultural arts and music program for our students in grades Kindergarten through fifth grades. 3. Evaluations: The academic programs are evaluated by the growth from the baseline to end assessments that are aligned to the LLSS and student work products (homework and projects), supported by teachers who use ClassDojo to communicate with parents The sports programs are evaluated by the Physical and Health standards, sportsmanship and tournaments / games played against other schools. The music program is evaluated by the NYC Blueprint for Music and the recitals / final performances. The theater program is evaluated by the NYC Blueprint for Theater and Arts, Listening and Speaking CCSS and final performances. The dancing program is evaluated by the NYC Blueprint for Dance and final performances. The science program will be evaluated by the NYC Science scope and sequence and standards and STEM Lab Assessment of the students' final science project. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Timeline: September 2018 - June 2019; approximately 28 weeks per program. 2018-19 SCEP-P 50  Timeline: November 2018 - June 2019; approximately 28 weeks per program that are funded by the SIG-7 grant. Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. Each program must have a minimum of six hours per week for 28 weeks. Each program will commence either one hour before school and/or three hours after the school day. For example, the five teachers working with the one-to-one reading program of 8 teachers for 6 hours a week for 30 weeks. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. 21st Century Title I 1003(a) X X Tax Levy X Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA SIG Grant P/F Set-aside School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The baseline assessments (academic, tryouts, auditions, etc.), will commence in September 2018. This will help us determine the students for the program(s). The mid-line assessments will occur in the end of February or first week of March 2019. The final assessment will occur in the end of May or early June 2019. (See Part 4 of the ELT program.) Part 6b. Indicate the instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teachers will use student friendly checklist to assist students with self- and peer-assessing; curriculum based rubrics to align and assess student work and progress from TC Writing, CKLA, Engage NY Math, Fountas & Pinnel, Dibbles, Sounds in Motion, Preventing Academic Failure (PAF), iReady, MyOn reading comprehenion, STEM LAB Cart science rubric, CCLS, and student work products. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 51  Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Running Records, Core Knowledge Language Arts Assessments and Baseline Assessments; and Preventive Academic Failure Assessments. Engage NY Eureka Math, Assessments and Baseline Assessments Interdisciplinary Literacy Science content writing tasks and the STEM Lab science assessments. Interdisciplinary Literacy Social Studies content writing tasks and the Core Knowledge Curriculum Assessments. Guidance Counselor Social Worker, Teachers of Small Group Instruction, Speech Teacher and School Psychologist Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Tier 2 and Tier 3 strategies from Core Knowledge and MOSL Inquiry Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small Group When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the School Day and Afterschool Small Group Small Group During the School Day and Afterschool During the School Day and Afterschool Small Group During the School Day One to One, Peer pairing and small group During the School Day Tier 2 and Tier 3 strategies from Engage NY Math and MOSL Inquiry Tier 2 and Tier 3 strategies from Core Knowledge / amplify and MOSL Inquiry Tier 2 and Tier 3 strategies from Core Knowledge, Engage NY Math and MOSL Inquiry Tier 2 and Tier 3 strategies from Pre-Referral Intervention Manual, Core Knowledge, EngageNYEureka math, Preventive Academic Failure, NYSapproved Guidance and Psychological 2018-19 SCEP-P 52  assessments andMOSLInquiry final assessments. 2018-19 SCEP-P 53  Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Approximately twenty-five (20%) percent of our students are students in temporary housing; approximately 60 students. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We, (principal, pupil accounting secretary, parent coordinator, guidance counselor, Brooklyn North Field Support Center Attendance Teacher, and social worker), work collaboratively with our students in temporary housing (STH) to meet the individual family needs. We have helped worked with department of transportation to provide bussing for students living in shelters. We provide our students with free book bags and educational materials, and school uniforms. Our STH are provided financial support (the school pays) to attend any of the school trips that have a fee to attend. Our students are welcomed to participate in any of our afterschool programs to provide students with academic support and extracurricular activities while assisting parents with childcare as they look for work or travel to and from work to pick up their children. We provide our parents with parenting supports that include on-site assistance with our Parent Coordinator and off-site with agencies that range from mental health, interviewing skills, etc. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). not applicable 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-P 54  not applicable 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. not applicable 2018-19 SCEP-P 55  Section 9: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Administrators have monthly meetings provided by the District that support the DOE’s initiatives, as well as providing us with methods and means to look at school-wide student data for the purposes of making informed decisions about systems and structures that need improving and those that are proving effective. All teachers are provided weekly on-site PDs by Administration, Teacher/colleagues, and/or Consultants. Select teachers attend off-site professional development to which they turn-key to their colleagues. Teachers are provided coverage to conduct in-school focused classroom inter-visitation to observe best teaching practices. All teachers are provided opportunity to share their inter-visitation observations with their colleagues and support colleagues in the implementation of the learned teaching practice. Administration encourages these on-site PDs and inter-visitation to build coherent best teaching practices in the school and provide quality delivery of the NYLS -aligned instruction to our students. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Not Applicable 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 2018-19 SCEP-P 56  Not Applicable Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). Our Universal Pre-Kindergarten teachers use the New York State Common Core State ELA, Math and Social Studies Standards. Additionally, our Pre-Kindergarten classrooms will be evaluated by the Early Childhood Environment Rating Scale (ECERS) which will informs us as to our strengths and areas we need to change to ensure that we meet compliance to ensure our preschoolers are prepared and ready for Kindergarten. Our Pre-Kindergarten teachers attend Professional Development and collaborate with our Kindergarten teachers on curriculum planning and share inquiry findings. Parents are invited to the orientation in the beginning of the school year and monthly events. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers are given the opportunity to participate in the Measure of Student Learning (MOSL) assessment process and deciding as to which MOSL assessment our students will be administered. Additionally, teachers collaborate with their grade level team teachers to review, decide and select the NYLS curriculum’s unit assessments and other NYLS aligned materials to be administered to our students. Additionally, grade level facilitators meet monthly to discuss the skills that the grades will be teaching and share their findings on the impact of student achievement based on the analyzing of student data from curriculum administered assessments and the inquiry assessment data. These findings are also shared at grade level conferences and at Staff Professional Development/meetings in effort to modify curriculum and lesson planning to drive instruction. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) 2018-19 SCEP-P 57  Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Federal Federal Federal Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 376,070 0 0 124,394 0 0 2,345,562 x n/a n/a x x n/a x Section 5a-5e, Section 6 n/a n/a Section 5a-5e, Section 6 Section 5a-5e, Section 6 n/a Section 5a-5e, Section 6 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH). 2018-19 SCEP-P 58   Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-P 59  Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 151K, the Lyndon Baines Johnson Elementary School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students PS 151K, the Lyndon Baines Johnson Elementary School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 SCEP-P 60  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; 2018-19 SCEP-P 61  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 151K, the Lyndon Baines Johnson Elementary School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; 2018-19 SCEP-P 62  ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the New York State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; etc. 2018-19 SCEP-P 63 I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents  Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; 2018-19 SCEP-P 64  ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-P 65  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-P 66  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: To date, P.S. 151K has 95 English Language Learners (ELLs), one of which tested commanding in 2016-17, in grades K-5; three English as a New Language (ENL) teachers that provide ENL instruction during the instructional school day and our fourth Bilingual licensed teacher, one that supports English as a New Language (ENL) through the science-content area, one that instructs the Dual Language classroom and one that teaches the First/second grade bridge Transitional Bilingual Classroom. Instructional time is determined according to each student’s individual level of proficiency as determined by the New York State Identification Test for English Language Learners (NYSITEL) and the corresponding guidelines under the New York State Commissioner’s Regulation Part 154. Entering and Emerging level students receive the mandated 360 minutes of ENL instruction per week; transitioning and expanding students receive 180 minutes per week. In our ENL program, Language Arts and content areas (Math, Science, and Social Studies) are taught utilizing ENL strategies and methodologies. The school’s goal is to strengthen our ELL population’s use of evidence in writing and discussion across all subjects. Through this, students will develop the skill of using evidence to support arguments in discussion and writing, which will then transfer to stronger writing in literacy and math, and develop the communication and collaboration skills that support college and career readiness. During common planning teachers are incorporating multiple formats to represent information and enhance student engagement. Our two groups of students will be part of the thirty (30) week after-school program, commencing the first week of October , 2018, in P.S. 151K is designed to implement a two part English program to target our two struggling ELL reader populations; in the lower grades (Kindergarten through second grades - K-2) and in our upper grades (third through fifth - 3-5) who are performing below grade level in English Language Arts (ELA) and math. Our first group: The Read Alliance Program which supports ELLs in grades K-2 will be conducted on Tuesdays, Wednesdays, and Thursdays beginning October 15, 2018 ( a minimum of 45 sessions) during the hours of 2:30-5:25. Our school's second group: Readers’ Café program which supports ELLs in grades 3-5 will be conducted on Wednesdays and Thursdays beginning October 17, 2018 (a minimum of 45 sessions), during the hours of 2:30-5:00 p.m. The goal is to continue the aforementioned afterschool programs until, at least, June 2, 2019, ensuring higher impact of student achievement through the incorporation of various modalities of learning. Please note that all of our ELLs are invited to stay for the afterschool program. Once parents enroll the stuents, we will then be able to be specific as to the small group-groupings. As of now, the students will be grouped into two bands K-2 and 3-5. The students will then receive English AIS based on their English proficiency. The students' in both after-school programs will begin with a snack in the cafeteria. During this time, program teachers will include conversational English to small-groups of students (a ratio of 1:15) followed by a "read aloud", which ties in to the speaking and listening standards in the New York State Literacy Learning Standards (NYSLLS). This program will build on the instructional course work from the school day. Our ELLs in Kindergarten, first, and second grades will participate with our community based organization "Read Alliance Program," which 2018-19 SCEP-P 67  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information will be overseen by our licensed teacher (Nursery-sixth grade). The curriculum used during the sessions is the “Reading for All Learners Program” (RALP), which incorporates the four language modalities to help enhance our ELLs' use of academic language. To assess students' progress within the four language modalities, students are administered various RALP assessments throughout the program. English Reading Comprehension and Fluency Testing administered by the Read Alliance and New York University (NYU) and other performance assessment information will be shared with our teachers and our school. This after school program runs for a minimum of 15 weeks, with three 60-minute one-to-one (ratio 1:1) sessions per week. The program sessions are divided into two sixty minute segments, one for reading English instruction with RALP materials and one for academic support to help address speaking, reading and writing in all content areas through small groups of six to ten students in a ratio of one to ten teacher student ratio. During the academic support segment of both after-school programs (K-2 and 3-5), the teachers will analyze the assessment data to group students and provide the appropriate supports necessary to both individual and small-groups of students during the academic support sessions. In Read Alliance, the analysis of the assessments from NYU and our Lead Teacher determines the grouping of the students during the literacy/science and mathematics academic supports, in addition to the materials provided during the one-to-one tutoring component of the session. In the Readers’ Café program, both our ENL and SWD-Bilingual licensed teachers will use on-going Fountas & Pinnel and teacher made assessments to determine student progress and student grouping. Additionally research proven internet-software programs will be used to provide tiered-level (multiple entry and/or differentiated) support and enrichment to both programs. Our teachers will provide enrichment using: the “Smarty Ants” Achieve 3000 program, which is an interactive foundational reading skills program, and the" Mathletics" program, which is an interactive foundational math skills program. The enrichment of content will be provided to our students through the use of 'Boardworks', an interactive educational software program aligned with the New York State Learning Standards, designed for teaching, ELA, math, and science on interactive whiteboards. The approximate amount for purchase of ELL materials such as smartyants of achieve 3000 program: 1,236.60. The Read Alliance afterschool program will have a student to teacher ratio of 10:1 and Reader's Café afterschool program will have a student to teacher ratio of 15:1. Teacher qualification consists of: four teachers with a Special Education Student with Disability (SWD) - Bilingual extension license, one teacher with Nursery through sixth grade common branch - bilingual extension license, two of our NYS licensed Teacher of English to Speakers of Other Languages (TESOL). To ensure cohesion and that each child receives explicit and appropriate instruction, each teacher will make use of their areas of expertise and teaching experience to enhance their delivery of play-related and ELL-related curricular materials and instruction in our ELL after school program; one teacher will provide content enrichment while the other is implementing the "Reading Café Program". The teachers will switch groups after an hour so that both groups have the opportunities to participate in each program. The "Reading Café" will provide the opportunity for students to listen, speak, read, and write in English through the use of visual arts, play writing and dramatic-play/theater performance. The content enrichment program will afford students the opportunity to practice the skills needed to enhance their listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills as well as the academic vocabulary needed to become successful college and career ready adults. The materials to be used will primarily consist of books from Lee and Low publishing that are contemporary diverse stories that emphasize the richness of today’s cultures and that all children could enjoy. The books are accompanied with extensive Teacher’s Guides, interviews with authors and illustrators, and Common Core resources developed by Lee and Low publishing literacy specialists that comprise 2018-19 SCEP-P 68  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information of strategies that include but are not limited to close reading and teaching vocabulary in layers. The Readers’ Café and the Content Enrichment program will also use the “Smarty Ants” program for newcomer-students in need of early literacy skills support. Boardworks will be used to provide the necessary visuals and interactive supports during content enrichment. We anticipated that these Title III activities and supports will continue through the 2018-2019 school-year. Budget for Direct instruction by the ENL, SWD and bilingual teachers: 7,419.60. Purchase of AIS materials, books, notebooks, materials to support listening, Reading, Writing and Speaking modalities: 2,473.20. Students’ attendance will be maintained by the teachers in the program, in addition to the copy submitted to the main office for afterschool program record keeping purposes. P.S.151K sends parent notifications in the parents preferred language. Notices that have to be translated from English to Spanish are done in-house by Administration or the Bilingual Licensed Teacher. If needed, we will use the Language Interpretation unit to translate parent letters. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Teachers of English Language Learners will attend ENL workshops and trainings intended to provide additional support and knowledge regarding the instruction of our ELL students. They will be provided with ongoing professional development through consultants, the use of webinars, in-house workshops, as well as workshops offered from DELLS and our Brooklyn North Field Support Center (BN FSC). This will ensure that ELLs are provided with the support needed to become college and career ready. The following is an example of the list of professional developments, which will provide a positive impact on the education of our ELLs. Professional Development Month Achieve 3000 Smarty Ants Interactive Program Read Alliance /NYU Workshops Training Boardworks Interactive Training Consultants October (a minimum of 2 hours per session) ELL RISING- Enhancing ENL instruction BN FSC Consultants Coaches November (a minimum of 2 hours per session) Integrating Science within the curriculum in the classroom with ELL supports BN FSC Consultants 2018-19 SCEP-P 69  Part C: Professional Development December (a minimum of 2 hours per session) ELL RISING- Enhancing ENL instruction (Turn-Key to staff members) January (a minimum of 2 hours per session) Understanding the NYSESLAT Assessment BN FSC Consultants February (a minimum of 2 hours per session) Mathematical Reasoning in the ENL Classroom Coaches Consultants March (a minimum of 2 hours per session) Teachers that attend professional developments or those that turn-key must provide a copy of the agenda to the ENL teacher, to be kept in our Staff Development Committee (SDC) binder. If Professional Developments are in-house a copy of the attendance sheet and the agenda will be kept in the same binder. Note, that the Professional Development sessions listed in the table above will be provided as follows: 1. Read Alliance and NYU, at a cost to 32K151, provide PD to the teachers in the program by their designated Professors/Experts 2. ELL and ENL instruction from BN FSC and DELLSS, at no cost to 32K151, provide PD to the teachers in the program and teachers in 32K151, by their designated School District Licensed ENL, TESOL and/or Bilingual licensed personnel. 3. Software and Internet programs from the Corporation Consultants (Achieve 3000, 3P Learning Mathletics, Boardworks, etc.) at a cost to 32K151, provide PD to the teachers in the programs and teachers in 32K151. 4. On-site PD by Consultants at the cost by the day. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Our ELL students will have a final award ceremony and present their reading, speaking and listening skills during their rehearsed plays to the parents throughout the course of the after school program and final ceremony. We, ENL, Bilingual, SWD and Common Branch Teachers with our Parent Coordinator's support, will assist our students to present the plays written and produced by our students. We expect our performances to take place both during our after school program and at a separate assembly when we present our play-acting and play-writing skills in a public performance in the spring. All of our ELL after school drama and reading 2018-19 SCEP-P 70  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities activities will involve performances by all of the students participating in the after school program. The rationale behind these activities is to increase our ELL students’ familiarity with and use of the four modalities of listening, speaking, reading, and writing, while simultaneously promoting a sense of pride and accomplishment while increasing their self-confidence to perform before each other and a live audience. Our ELL students will also acquire a greater knowledge of and improvement in their overall English skills while attaining a greater confidence in reading, writing, and speaking as they increase their vocabulary, comprehension, and fluency in English. Parents will be notified of our ELL play productions and ceremonies by letters, phone calls, fliers, student word-of-mouth, and our parent coordinator’s effective outreach of information to our parents, families, and the P.S. 151 community, in general i.e. Remind App, Skedula/Pupil Path. Additionally, our ENL teachers communicate with our ELL parents and their families through frequent letters and fliers sent directly home to inform our parents of important ELL information and updates. Parental notifications are sent home at the beginning of the academic school year to our ELL parents and guardians in the form of Entitlement Letters, Continued Entitlement Letters, Non-Entitlement Letters, Parent Preferred Language Forms, Placement Letters, and ELL Parent Brochures in their home or preferred language. Parents of newly identified ELLs are also invited to P.S. 151 for a Parent Orientation and a viewing of the Parent Orientation Video explaining their options and rights as the parent or guardian of an ELL student. In the fall, the parents of ELLs will receive the Title III supplemental program information during the evening parent Orientation scheduled in September 2018. The Title III Parent meetings which will be scheduled on October 2018 during morning and evening times. During these sessions parents will receive a letter explaining the supplemental services their child will receive as an ELL student, and the details of the after school program in which their child is invited to participate. Immediately following this meeting, parents of the ELL students will receive a Title III letter inviting their child to attend the after-school program commencing October 1, 2018, that will contain a description of the instructional program and its benefits. Attached to the letter will be a permission slip form and an opt-out form, should they choose. In the Spring, letters are sent to the parents informing them of the upcoming NYSESLAT assessments, how it establishes their child’s level of English proficiency based upon the results of the NYSESLAT, and the importance of their child’s participation in the NYSESLAT. In addition, our parent coordinator facilitates parent workshops throughout the year to all parents, including the parents of the ELLs. Workshops are based on the needs of the students as well as the parents. Designated ELL Parent Workshops will commence in January 2018 to provide the parents the tools and strategies to support our student's reading while reading their independent reading level just right books and/or books of interests. However, all parents are notified and invited to attend our educational internet-based curriculum such as MyOn, Mathletics and Smarty Ants that can be accessed from the students' home computer/table. Lastly, our ELL students will participate in culminating drama activities through their active involvement in and the excitement of live productions to be presented before students, parents, family members, and the P.S. 151K community. We anticipate the production of these performances in May and June 2019, with specific calendar dates to be chosen closer to these actual upcoming months. We will hold both in-school and after-school performances to maximize the potential audiences ability to see these performances. Each performance will 2018-19 SCEP-P 71  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities consist of three or four short plays, monologues, read alouds, performed by the ELL students on these future dates, with costumes and sets designed by the students with the help of parents. We expect to have parents participating at these specialized events in addition to the school-wide events. Records will be maintained by the ENL teacher and the parent coordinator. A copy of agendas, attendance sheets, and invitations in the parents’ preferred language will be kept in the ENL teacher’s classroom and in the parent coordinator’s office. Parents’ of ELLs are invited to participate in school year events, workshops, and professional developments offered by the parent coordinator. Parents will be notified of the following events by phone calls, fliers, student word-of-mouth, and our parent coordinator’s effective outreach of information to our parents, families, and the P.S. 151 community, in general i.e. Skedula/Pupil path and Remind App. The following is a list of parent meetings, workshops, and events for the 2018-2019: Event Month Pre-K and Kindergarten Parent Orientation September , 2018 Grandparents Day Celebration September , 2018 Dad’s Bring your Child to School September , 2018 ENL Parent Orientation September 2018 Family Night September 2018 PBIS Back to School Dance September , 2018 PA Meeting/Workshop- “Citizen Preparedness Workshop” September , 2018 Girl Scout Parent Orientation September , 2018 Parent Orientation for Read Alliance October , 2018 Bully Prevention Workshop October , 2018 Annual Title I Workshop during the PA Meeting October , 2018 MyOn Literacy Workshop October , 2018 Skedula (Pupil Path) Data and Communication PD November 2018 Transitioning to Middle School and the Application Process Workshop November , 2018 Honor Roll Assemblies November , 2018 International-Multicultural School wide Day Celebration Event November 2018 PA Meeting with Dial-A-Teacher Math Work Workshop 2018-19 SCEP-P 72  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities November , 2018 FDNY Fire Safety Workshop December , 2018 PA Holiday Celebration December , 2018 Fun Night with Male Role Models January , 2019 Kindergarten Open House January , 2019 Test Preparation Workshop for the NYS ELA and Math Exams January , 2019 Pre-K Open House February , 2019 Cornell University Nutrition and Parenting Skills Workshop 8 weeks (TBD) PA Meeting with College and Career Readiness: February 2019 Read Across America-Dr. Seuss Day- Parent Read Aloud March 2, 2019 Fifth Grade Parent Meeting March 2019 Honor Roll Assemblies March 2019 Science Family Night March 2019 Trip for Dads to Liberty Science Center April 2019 PA Meeting with Stress Management Workshop April 2019 PBIS Celebration -Cinco de Mayo May 2019 Mother’s Day Trip May 2019 Girl Scout Ceremony May 2019 PA Meeting with Election May 2019 Medievel - Middle Ages Times May 2019 Art and Music Festival June 2019 Physical Education and Health Event Field Days May & June 2019 Dance and Drama Festival June 2019 Pre-K Stepping Up June 2019 Final Academic and Social Emotional Awards Assemblies June 2019 Kindergarten – Moving- Up Ceremonies June 2019 2018-19 SCEP-P 73  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities 5th Grade Moving-Up Ceremonies June 2019 The above listed events include most of the events. Note that dates may be subject to change and rescheduled to another date due to weather, etc. Parent Involvement expenses for materials to engage parents in monthly activities are approximately: 1,236.60. Note, that at every Parent/family sessions listed in the table above will have our Parent Coordinator, who speaks both English and Spanish fluently, present at all sessions to assist with the translations with our Spanish Speaking Parents. The workshops are provided as follows: 1. Read Alliance and NYU, at a cost to 32K151, provide three workshops to he parents by their designated Professors/Experts, at a cost to 32K151. 2. BN FSC will provide a workshop for our parents at no cost to 32K151, by their designated School District Licensed ENL, TESOL and/or Bilingual licensed personnel. 3. Software and Internet programs and CBO Corporation Consultants (Skedula at a cost to 32K151, Cornell University at no cost, Dial a Teacher, at no cost to 32K151, etc.) provide workshops to the parents. 4. School Level workshops are provided by our NYS TESOL, ENL and Bilingual Licensed teachers to our parents, such as homework help, dance, arts, science, etc., at per session rate cost to 32K151 when conducted during afterschool hours. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) n/a  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel n/a n/a n/a Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. n/a n/a n/a n/a 2018-19 SCEP-P 74 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. n/a n/a n/a Other TOTAL n/a n/a n/a 2018-19 SCEP-P 75  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 32 School Name Lyndon Baines Johnson Borough Brooklyn School Number 151 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Ms. Jayne Hunt Coach Cinthia Diaz ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Sandra Mojica Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Superintendent Assistant Principal n/a Coach Carolyn Alliers School Counselor Ms.Annette Rivera Parent Elizabeth Rodriguez Parent Coordinator Ms. Nilsa Figueroa Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 3 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 276 2018-19 SCEP-P 76 Total number of ELLs 95 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 34.42%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Yes NoFreestanding ENL Yes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown Program TBE Lang. Span. TBE TBE DL DL DL Span Span Span School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2018-19 2016-2017 2017-2018 2018-2019 1 1 1 Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 1 1 K 1 2 3 1 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 1 0 0 1 1 1 4 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? At P.S. 151K, early literacy and math skills are assessed using the NYSESLAT, Teachers College (TCRWP) running records, Core Knowledge Language Arts (CKLA) and Go Math! curriculum assessments as well as formal and informal teacher-made assessments. These assessments provide us with valuable data and information as to our students' oral fluency, reading comprehension skills, English proficiency levels and math skills. For instance based on our school wide TCRWP September assessments 100% of our ELLs have an average F&P benchmark scoring proficiency level of 1.93 which is in keeping with the 2018 NYSELA average proficiency level rating for our 3-5 grade students. Thirty percent of our third through fifth graders scored a proficiency level of two or higher in their F&P benchmark. These data assist us in planning and implementing our 2018-19 SCEP-P 77  differentiated instructional plans to best meet the learning needs and learning styles of our ELLs, and to make progress against any apparent learning gaps. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? In order to guide instructional planning for ELLs we employ best practice to address the areas of need identified in the 2017-2018 New York State Math and English Language Arts (ELA) assessments. Furthermore, we will continue to strengthen our balanced literacy program by incorporating social studies thematic based learning and additional science (non-fiction texts) into our New York state learning standards (NYSLS) Core Knowledge Language Arts and Engage NY Eureka Math Curriculum. To strengthen student writing and voice, we are incorporating the Teacher's College (TC) writing program into our daily student programs. Accordingly, we are continuing to refine our literacy curriculum and lesson plans to focus on the use of evidence grounded in speaking and writing across all subjects. We will accomplish this by incorporating student discourse in math, science and social studies as well as having our teachers focus on the NYS LS Speaking and Listening Standards. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of ELLs at P.S. 151K is measured using state wide test results, NYC Performance Tasks, running records, interim assessments, grade level iReady skills analysis assessment and the NYSESLAT results. Our programs are rich in intentional oral communication (conversation), as evident in the high NYSESLAT speaking scores. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Structures that are in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered is the continuation of strengthening Lesson Plans to include coherent assessments that include response to intervention (RtI) throughout the grades. New this 2018-19 school year, we will expand our Spanish-English dual language program to a second grade Spanish-English dual language program. We will continue to provide our teachers planning opportunities during the school day and during the city-wide Professional Learning (PLC) time. A school-wide Danielson Framework for Teaching (DfT), citywide Framework for Great Schools and Quality Review (QR) aligned planning template is provided to ensure that they incorporate essential questions, Universal Design for Learning (UDL) strategies and learning targets tied to grade-specific units of student and performance tasks. Currently, unit plans are developed by the teacher grade level teams to include performance based assessments that require higher order thinking skills and explicitly provide access for ELLs and SWDs. The unit planning team which includes members of teachers from various grades and pupil support team members to ensure that the school-wide inquiry foci are cohesive to monitor student achievement and to guide grade level team to shape the unit and lesson planning. Additionally, we will continue to include the Speaking and Listening standards to supplement the content NYSLS and ensure targeted student discourse is occurring within all subjects and classes. As a result, teachers will continue to be engaged in the process of planning across grades and subjects for all groups of students and include intentional grouping and targeted differentiated tasks.We will employ this best practice to address the areas of need identified in the 2017 - 2018 New York State Math and English Language Arts (ELA) assessments. Furthermore, we will continue to strengthen our balanced literacy program by incorporating social studies thematic based learning and additional science (non-fiction texts) into our new york state learning standards (NYSLS) Core Knowledge Language Arts and Engage NY Eureka Math Curriculum. To strengthen student writing and voice, we are incorporating the Teacher's College (TC) writing program into our daily student programs. Accordingly, we are continuing to refine our literacy curriculum and lesson plans to focus on the use of evidence grounded in speaking and writing across all subjects. We will accomplish this by incorporating student discourse in math, science and social studies as well as having our teachers focus on the NYSLS Speaking and Listening Standards. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Data as the NYSITELL and previous year's NYSESLAT scores are used to determine our ENL students' current level of English proficiency. Additionally, teachers administer the Teachers College running records every 60 days or less, to gather detail data as to fluency and English reading comprehension skills. In the 2015-16 school year our school adopted the two new Core Knowledge Language Arts (CKLA) Reading Program, which is aligned with the bilingual progressions and Columbia University's Teacher's College Writing (TC) Programs. Both CKLA and TC Writing Workshop curriculum are embedded with strategies to 2018-19 SCEP-P 78  support our diverse learners, English Language Learners (ELL) and student with disabilities (SWD). These programs provide tier 1 and tier 2 supports for all our of students. Our Teachers are in the process of learning and building pedagogy proficiency with the two programs, refining protocols to monitor and adjust curricula to support student learning outcomes. A core belief observed across most classes during instruction is the use of strategic grouping to target misconceptions and support higher-order thinking discussions among students. However, we are to "continue to provide support within teacher teams to stress the importance of rigorous tasks and increase the focus on strong pedagogy to make sure that practices support student discussion and work products across classrooms. Reinforce the alignment between curricula and student tasks through actionable feedback and coaching. Since there is a focus on strengthening balanced literacy via social studies thematic-based learning and additional science non-fiction texts in the school’s curriculum, ensure that you examine the manner, methods and means by which teachers implement resources and materials to facilitate such lessons. Equally, continue to highlight the Teachers College (TC) writing process as the school’s model for writing and incorporate the writing process into daily lessons. Ensure that during mini-lessons teachers support students in learning the pre-writing, draft, revising, editing and publishing elements. As they become independent writers they will also focus more on author’s craft and devices to make their writing more interesting, see themselves as authors and take ownership of their learning. " Intentional small grouping with classroom teachers and ENL teachers, affords the students the opportunity to practice oral and written language with strong vocabulary support and topics that include home and cultural knowledge connections. ELL students have writing journals that capture ELL student English language progress and provides on-going data to teachers as to further instructional support to provide our ELLs. These RtI practices are used in mathematics, science, social studies and in our morning meetings used for social-emotional development. Teachers provide many opportunities in small-group and whole-group instruction allowing all students, especially ELLs, opportunity to engage in purposeful conversation and writing. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The patterns for the newcomers within one year of testing between the NYSITELL and the NYSESLAT are as follows: Out of the ten students that were administered the NYSITELL in kindergarten, eight remained on the same performance level, two showed progress and moved up one level or higher. One student in third grade had the same performance level on the NYSESLAT as he/she had on the NYSITELL. One student in the fifth grade scored Commanding in the 2017 NYSESLAT. We are learning that the NYSITELL is another data that helps inform teachers of the students' knowledge of the English language. When planning, teachers incorporate more audio support to increase students' listening skills as well as well as their speaking skills. This is also evident in the NYSESLAT 2017 speaking and listening modalities as our students score higher than the reading and writing. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Teachers will use student friendly checklist to assist students with self- and peer-assessing; curriculum based rubrics to align and assess student work and progress from TC Writing, CKLA, EngageNY Eureka Math, Fountas & Pinnel, Dibbles, Sounds in Motion, Preventing Academic Failure (PAF), iReady, MyOn reading comprehension, Achieve 3000, Smartyants and Learning A-Z, NYSLS, and student work products. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. 2018-19 SCEP-P 79  At P.S. 151K instruction is delivered efficiently and effectively in a push-in or pull-out method as mandated by the State of New York. The instruction for our English Language Learners consists of the following organizational model: a. Entering will receive 180 minutes of standalone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA b. Emerging will receive 90 minutes of standalone ENL, 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA, it has a flexibility of 90 minutes of standalone OR integrated ENL (with ELA or any other content area) c. Transitioning will receive 90 integrated ENL/ELA minutes and 90 standalone or integrated ENL(with ELA or any content area) d. Expanding will receive 180 integrated ENL/ELA or other content area e. Commanding will receive 90 integrated ENL/ELA or other content area b. TBE program. If applicable. Instruction for ELLs in the TBE program is based on the student's proficiency level. Please see the table below: English Proficiency Level Home Language English Entering 75% 25% Emerging 60% 40% Transitioning 50% 50% Expanding 25% 75% As a student's English proficiency increases, more of his or her instructional day is spent learning in English. The TBE teacher helps the ELL develop strong literacy skills in their home language by providing Home Language Arts instruction (HLA). Entering and Emerging students receive 360 minutes of HLA a week and a minimum 2 periods of bilingual content area instruction, while students who are at a proficiency level of transitioning and expanding receive 180 minutes of HLA as well as 1 period of bilingual content area instruction. Students in the TBE classroom also receive ENL instruction in order to help them acquire the English language. Minutes per week for each student are as follows: English Proficiency Level Entering Emerging Transitioning Expanding Commanding Stand-Alone ENL 180 minutes 90 minutes Integrated ENL 180 minutes 180 minutes 90 minutes 180 minutes 2018-19 SCEP-P 80  In ENL/ELA or other Content Area Flexibility 90 minutes Can be Stand-Alone ENL or Integrated ENL/content area 90 minutes Can be Stand-Alone ENL or Integrated ENL/content area 90 minutes per week Integrated ENL in ELA/Content Area Former ELL service for two additional years c. DL program. If applicable. Instruction in the Dual Language Program is delivered in accordance to the CR Part 154. Our Dual Language Programs are self-contained and the teachers are certified in bilingual education. Content area instruction is delivered by using the alternating day model in which language use alternates day to day. Our Dual Language program includes the following: a. an ENL component designed to develop skills in listening, speaking, reading and writing in English b. all content-area subjects are taught in the home language and English c. a home language arts component designed to develop skills in listening, speaking, reading and writing in the students' home language while cultivating an appreciation of their history and culture. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Our ENL and bilingual teachers ensure that instructional minutes are delivered in each program model by providing the mandated minutes in ENL, ELA, and HLA depending on the student's proficiency level, in accordance to the CR Part 154.2. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. To support content area instruction, ENL, bilingual and classroom teachers use the appropriate manipulatives, leveled reading books, pictures, repetition, and technology to contextualize the instruction. In all instructional models, students consistently work in small group settings, receive appropriate scaffolds and mandated instructional services. Teachers group their students of the same language for certain activities so that they can assist each other in their native language. The ENL teacher provides content area support by providing the proper scaffolds based on the levels of proficiency. When needed teachers are provided with Spanish math books to make content area more comprehensible for students whose native language is Spanish. Spanish and Arabic dictionaries are also available for our ELL population. Math and Science State Exams are also available in Spanish and if needed in another language, the services of an interpreter will be sought. Teachers in the TBE and Dual Language Programs follow the New Language Arts Progressions (NLAP) and Home Language Arts Progression (HLAP) for every New York State Common Core Learning Standard; students are also immersed in social studies thematic curriculum aligned with the New York State Bilingual Common Core and the New York State Common Core Learning Standards integrated with cultural components. Our school also provides engaging activities, which consist of first hand experiences through culminating activities such as cultural events, museums, farms, etc., within the content areas so that students can develop the academic language necessary in the students' first and second language. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Our school ensures that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home language by using the Fountas & Pinnell "Sistema de evaluacion de la lectura (SEL). This helps determine the student's independent and instructional reading levels in Spanish. The 2018-19 SCEP-P 81  Estrellita phonics program also has ongoing assessments in the student's home language. Throughout the school year, periodic assessments will be given in Spanish as per Core Knowledge and EngageNY Math curriculum. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Bilingual teachers and ENL teachers ensure that ELL instruction is aligned with the Common Core State Standards across all subject areas. ENL students required to take the ELA state exam after one-year of enrollment, receive ELA and ENL instruction throughout the day and are given additional opportunities to master these skills both in and out of the classroom. In the ELA classroom, ELL students are provided a print-rich classroom environment to support reading proficiency levels. The ELA and ENL classroom teachers utilize research based learning strategies such as graphic organizers, strategy charts, and academic vocabulary, to foster opportunities for discussion by making language accessible across subject areas. ELL students are supported through a Title III Afterschool Program. Furthermore, the ENL and classroom teachers utilize resources such as, Starfall.com, CKLA RtI, that incorporate ENL and ELA strategies/skills. The ENL and classroom teacher make content comprehensible by using native language support. In the freestanding ENL models, content-area instruction is delivered in English using ENL strategies along with Native language supports to enrich comprehension. a. SIFE students entering the school receive additional services and interventions needed to access grade level curriculum. Strategies to support students include phonemic awareness, leveled readers, scaffolded writing instruction, small group instruction, teacher conferencing, and peer-support systems. Technology is integrated for SIFE students by providing them access to ENL websites, as well as academic resources that are available to their mainstreamed peers. SIFE students receive the mandated 360 minutes of ENL/ELA instruction in addition to ELA, Math, and ENL afterschool programs. Furthermore, SIFE students will be part of PS151k inquiry teams. A parent-home connection is in place to ensure that the parents are included as a vital component of student learning. b. Newcomers receive the mandated instructional minutes of ENL/ELA service and have access to language learning technology and programs available through the school's portaportal website. Classroom teachers provide scaffolded instruction in all content areas. Our balanced literacy approach supports students through a multitude of reading and writing strategies which include read alouds, shared reading/writing etc. c. Students who are developing are provided with differentiated instruction based on the NYSITELL, NYSESLAT scores, and individual proficiency levels. These ENL students also receive the same standard, well-balanced approach to learning in which they receive daily thematic unit-based instruction of academic content in support of the language modalities of listening, speaking, reading, and writing, as well as in vocabulary and word work. ENL students requiring additional support are provided Academic Intervention Services (AIS) in small groups designed to improve their reading and writing skills. d. Our long-term ELL students whom have completed six (6) years of ENL services are also provided differentiated instruction based upon their NYSESLAT and State Exam Scores. These long-term ENL students also receive the same standard, well-balanced approach to learning in which they receive daily thematic unit-based instruction of academic content in support of the language modalities of listening, speaking, reading, and writing. Additionally, we provide these long-term ENL students with a Title III after school program designed to support and enhance their vocabulary as well as improve their reading and writing comprehension and fluency. e. Former ENL students will continue to receive support for up to two years after receiving a proficiency level of commanding. Former ELLs will receive 90 minutes a week of ENL/ELA support. Testing accommodations and transition support will also available. They will receive differentiated instruction based on State Exams and classroom assessments. They will also receive the same standard, well-balanced approach to learning in which they receive daily thematic unit-based instruction of academic content, in support of the language modalities of listening, speaking, reading, and writing. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? P.S. 151K provides daily reading and writing instructional blocks as well as small group guided reading instruction utilizing the Ready Gen and Core Knowledge English curriculum to increase reading comprehension skills. In addition our third, fourth, 2018-19 SCEP-P 82  and fifth grade students participate in a Title III reading program on Tuesdays, Wednesdays, and Thursdays which focuses on the content area of literacy. Teachers provide students with meaningful visual aids, graphic organizers, and thinking maps to assist in student learning. Students are also provided with direct instruction, modeling, scaffolding, hands-on activities, repetition, and cooperative learning to support their instructional needs as well as to helping our students to narrow and close any reading/writing gaps. Our ENL curriculum is a standard, well-balanced approach to learning in which students receive daily instruction in all areas of language, including listening, speaking, reading, writing, vocabulary, and word work. All ENL instruction is apportioned in accordance with the New York City Department of Education's Language Allocation Policy and is consistent with the CR Part 154 requirements as determined by the performance of our students on the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT. Every classroom at P.S. 151K has a smartboard therefore making technology accessible to every student including ELLs. Teachers can create interactive and multimedia lessons to support ELL instruction through visual representation. Our school also has a computer lab in which students do research, create writing pieces, and learn how to create PowerPoint presentations with the assistance of the technology teacher. They also have access to educational websites like "National Geographic" and"Discovery Channel" just to name a few. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility is designed to meet the diverse needs of our ELLs-SWDs in the least restrictive environment. P.S. 151K includes opportunities for differentiated instruction according to the reading and writing levels of our students, as well as differentiated instruction based upon the varying English proficiency levels and learning needs of our individual ELL-SWD students. Collaboration with the classroom teacher, as well as mutually-agreeable scheduling are important curricular and instructional components in meeting the academic needs of our ELL students by our ENL teacher, IEP teacher and classroom teachers. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. We have many targeted interventions in ELA, math, and content areas for ELLs which include: a. The NYCDOE Ready Gen literacy curriculum, Core Knowledge Language Arts (CKLA) reading program, leveled reading books, multicultural songs, and reading activities. b. Teachers College Writing Program c. Small differentiated guided reading groups. d. The Go Math curriculum, hands-on activities, and meaningful games. e. Our ENL classes provide differentiated instruction by process, content, environment, and affect according to our students' interests, learning profiles, and readiness levels. We also provide vocabulary support, reading and writing comprehension and fluency strategies, grammar instruction, and speaking and listening skills through our instruction of thematic units. f. Our science and social studies curricula are language-supported for ELLs with bilingual dictionaries and content specific bilingual glossaries. Our ELLs are also supported with instruction through the in-classroom use of hands-on experiments, projects, and activities designed and implemented to support our students in their discovery and exploration of science and social studies learning. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? In the 2015-2016 academic year, we implemented Core Knowledge Language Arts reading program as a support for thematic unit based instruction. The program is aligned with the bilingual common core progressions (Entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding and commanding. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? In the 2018-19 school year we will not discontinue any programs or services for our ENL students. We will continue to provide freestanding ENL education program as mandated by the state of New York. 2018-19 SCEP-P 83  11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. At P.S.151K all students, including ELLs, have access to all materials and programs. As part of our Title III funds for ELLs, Kindergarten, first and second grade ELLs participated in the "Reading for All Learners Program" which is offered through the Read Alliance Organization. This program provided one-to-one tutoring in literacy. Fluency, decoding, and comprehension skills were targeted and assessed, in order to allow students to participate in class instruction at a level with their peers. Students in grades 3-5 participated in an afterschool program known as "Readers Café". This afterschool used theater to promote reading comprehension skills. The Test Prep Academy also had ELLs in attendance to provide support in math and ELA. ELLs were also invited to participate in the afterschool extracurricular activities such as volleyball, basketball, band, theater, and ballroom dancing. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. All ELLs have access to computers, multicultural books and stories in their regular classroom and in the P.S. 151K computer lab. Each classroom and teacher are provided with a computer and Smartboard to access various interactive and educational websites to enhance our ELLs' learning, as well as to increase our students' exposure to and hands-on use of technology. Our schools portaportal page allows students to gain access to educational websites such as "Discovery Channel" and "National Geographic. It also includes interactive websites that allow students to learn skills needed in math and ELA through games. ELL students also have access to picture dictionaries, bilingual dictionaries, bilingual content area glossaries, visual aids, graphic organizers, and other visual and tactile learning tools to increase their learning and comprehension of both language and content material. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In our freestanding ENL program, our English language learning students receive native language support through the use of bilingual dictionaries and bilingual content-area glossaries. Our special needs ELLs also receive native language support through the inclusion of bilingual paraprofessionals in their classrooms. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Our required services support and resources correspond to our English language learners' varying ages, grade levels, and different levels of language proficiencies. Our ENL students are also supported through required services in their content area subjects and content area instruction in the classroom by both the ENL teacher and the classroom teacher. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? All ELLs have access to computers, multicultural books and stories in their regular classroom and in the P.S. 151K computer lab. Each classroom and teacher are provided with a computer and Smartboard to access various interactive and educational websites to enhance our ELLs' learning, as well as to increase our students' exposure to and hands-on use of technology. Our schools portaportal page allows students to gain access to educational websites such as "Discovery Channel" and "National Geographic. It also includes interactive websites that allow students to learn skills needed in math and ELA through games. ELL students also have access to picture dictionaries, bilingual dictionaries, bilingual content area glossaries, visual aids, realia, graphic organizers, and other visual and tactile learning tools to increase their learning and comprehension of both language and content material. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Prior to the beginning of the school year, we provide our parents and guardians of our incoming English language learners at P.S. 151K with a newsletter and pamphlets welcoming new parents to our school. These newsletters and pamphlets are translated into various home languages of our parents and students, as well as in English. On the first day of school and throughout the following week or so, our parent coordinator greets and welcomes new parents and students at the entrance 2018-19 SCEP-P 84  of the school and holds parental meetings to introduce them to P.S. 151K. Our ENL teachers also provide our newly enrolled ENL students with a tour of the school and also provide any interested parents an opportunity to sit in on an ENL class to assist them in determining their choice of an English language learning program for their child and our new students. At P.S. 151K we strive to maintain a life-long learning community in which our students feel safe and comfortable in their school. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? P.S. 151K does not provide any language electives for the ELLs or any other students in our school at this time. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? P.S. 151K currently offers three self-contained Spanish / English dual language self-contained programs; in grades Pre-Kindergarten, Kindergarten, First and for the 2018-19 school year we are schedule to continue to expand our program to the second grade. Our Academic and Personal Behavior curricula are taught using the "two-way immersion" characteristics, whereas 50% of the instruction is taught - provided in both English and Spanish to all students. Instruction of Literacy and all other contents are taught in one language at at at time without translation using an alternate day model. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All of our ELL personnel and teachers of ELLs are highly encouraged to attend and participate in numerous professional development seminars intended to provide additional support and knowledge regarding the instruction of our ELL students, and all students, throughout the academic school year. This school year a designated teacher from each grade will attend Professional Developments for the "Writer's Workshop" at Teacher's College, and turn key to peers on the grade. At P.S.151K, we hold weekly administration-initiated professional development workshops for all teachers. In addition our ENL teachers frequently attend professional development seminars and workshops related to ENL curriculum and instruction throughout the academic school year, which they then turn-key to teachers of ELLs. Our teachers, support personnel, and administrators attend various professional development seminars throughout the year. The calendar for PD dates is as follows: a. What do we do with our Newcomers b. Identification and Process of ELLs c. Implementation of the Language Allocation Policy d. How to use UDL and DOK to support Language and Literacy for ELLs e. How to plan for your ELLs f. Understanding the NYSESLAT Assessment g. Scaffolding Strategies for ELLs All teachers at P.S.151K are encouraged to attend professional developments that are offered by the Division of English Language Learners & Student Support (DELLSS) and the Brooklyn North Field Support Center (BNFSC). ENL teachers attend professional development offered by DELLSS and turnkey the information to all teachers. Teachers are also encouraged to use the resources available through "Engage New York" and the DOE Intranet, which provides access to videos such as "What can we do to Support our English Language Learners", "Mathematics Problem Solving Strategies for ELLs in Elementary Grades" and "Response to Intervention" to name a few. 2018-19 SCEP-P 85  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our guidance counselor and parent coordinator assist our fifth grade students in transitioning from P.S.151K to middle school by providing assistance and the information needed. They begin by providing parents an informational workshop in English and Spanish, so that they can make an informed decision, when choosing a middle school for their child. Additionally students and parents are given an opportunity to visit open-houses to learn more about the middle schools in their community. Our fifth grade students receive a district-wide booklet and application listing their choices of middle school. This booklet describes the programs offered by each middle school, as well as the number of students attending each school. Students are given the opportunity to select the schools of their choice in preferential order, and every reasonable attempt is made to fulfill one of the students' top two selected middle schools. Parents must sign off on the student middle school selection sheet. Additionally, some schools require interviews and portfolio reviews in making the decision to accept our students into their middle school. Students are also given the opportunity to visit some of the middle schools in the district to assist them in making their decisions regarding middle school selection. The guidance counselor also provides an orientation to fifth grade teachers to familiarize them with the articulation process and the middle school application process. All of our staff, including our non-ELL teachers, will receive a minimum of fifteen percent of the required professional development hours and our ENL teachers will receive fifty percent on implementing strategies such as thinking maps, visual aids, etc. to assist our ELL students in the classroom. These workshops will cover various instructional methods and topics such as differentiating instruction to meet the needs of all learners, language acquisition skills, and literacy workshop models. These instructional tools and strategies are to be implemented school-wide with a special emphasis placed on teaching our special education and ELLs. Some of the training and professional development workshops will be initiated by and led by our Bilingual and ENL teachers and will focus on differentiated instruction, teaching strategies for ELLs, and ELL vocabulary development. Content area teachers and ENL teachers will also receive training and professional development throughout the year, by attending PDs offered by DELLSS and the DOE Intranet. and the ENL teachers will receive in the content area subjects and instruction. Agendas and sign in sheets will be kept in a binder as evidence of teachers meeting the professional development requirements as CR Part 154.2. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our school will use the Tuesday parent engagement time (2:30pm-3:45pm) to provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs; to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs within content areas. If there are students that have similar needs within a content area and/or social emotional needs those parents will be invited to attend a group meeting to provide them with strategies that they can use to support their child at home. Special arrangements will be made for parents that can not attend meetings during the Tuesday Parent Engagement time. We will reach out to the translation and interpretation unit and ask for assistance if there is a parent that is need of those services. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our goal is to encourage families to be actively involved in the learning community of our school. Pedagogues offer workshops throughout the school year, on topics such as Sate standards, State and City assessments, school expectations, and homework help. We begin on parent involvement meetings in September, and continue every month thereafter, by providing our parents academic and social emotional learning workshops such as Homework Help, Math, Literacy, Science, Test Preparation, stress, and nutrition, etc.. The workshop explores the importance on how parents can provide assistance 2018-19 SCEP-P 86  while still helping their child develop responsibility and self discipline. ENL teachers also provide workshops to provide parents of ELLs strategies that can be used to help their child acquire the skills necessary to succeed academically, in addition our science teacher who is also a certified bilingual teacher provides science workshops. The parent coordinator along with the parents association arrange several holiday luncheons in which parents as well as staff members contribute a dish and come together to enjoy holiday festivities. The parent coordinator creates fliers and agendas for the workshops/meetings, which she translates into Spanish. She is responsible for making sure that the letters and fliers are copied and distributed to the classroom teachers so that they can distribute them to the students in the class. She also posts the invitations on the doors around the school building to make them visible for parents or family members who pick up their children from school. If needed the Translation and Interpretation Unit will be contacted for parents that speak another language other than English/Spanish. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. n/a 2018-19 SCEP-P 87 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Jayne Hunt, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-P 88  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Lyndon Baines Johnson School DBN: 32K151 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Mrs. Jayne Hunt Title Principal n/a Assistant Principal Mrs. Nilsa Figueroa Parent Coordinator Ms. SolMaria Martinez ENL/Bilingual Teacher Ms. Elizabeth Rodriguez Parent Ms. Sandra Mojica Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Ms. Annette Rivera School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/28/18 00/00/00 06/28/18 06/28/18 06/28/18 06/28/18 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 06/28/18 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-P 89  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 32K151 School Name: P.S.151K Superintendent: Ms. sheilaGors The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Sandra Mojica Bilingual Teacher No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. P.S.151K uses the findings from the Home Language Identification Surveys (HLIS), ATS Report of Preferred Languages, and Parent Surveys to determine the language needs of parents within the school community. Although we have parents that speak Arabic, Haitian Creole, Tagalog, and Spanish, the vast majority speak Spanish, therefore, the communication between the school community and the parents, including monthly school calendars and notices, are sent home in Spanish and English. At the moment parents that speak Arabic and Haitian Creole prefer to receive oral and written communication from the school in English. When needed, P.S.151K will use the translation and interpretation services that is offered through the Department of Education. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 SCEP-P 90  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral The majority of the parents at our school prefer to receive written and oral communication in English. The parents that have Arabic, Haitian Creole, and Tagalog as their home language prefer to receive their information in English. Some of the parents that speak Spanish prefer to receive communication from the school in English as well while others want it in Spanish. The majority of the parents at our school prefer to receive written and oral communication in English. The parents that have Arabic, Haitian Creole, and Tagalog as their home language prefer to receive their information in English. Some of the parents that speak Spanish prefer to receive communication from the school in English as well while others want it in Spanish. The majority of the parents at our school prefer to receive written and oral communication in English. The parents that have Arabic, Haitian Creole, and Tagalog as their home language prefer to receive their information in English. Some of the parents that speak Spanish prefer to receive communication from the school in English as well while others want it in Spanish. The majority of the parents at our school prefer to receive written and oral communication in English. The parents that have Arabic, Haitian Creole, and Tagalog as their home language prefer to receive their information in English. Some of the parents that speak Spanish prefer to receive communication from the school in English as well while others want it in Spanish. The majority of the parents at our school prefer to receive written and oral communication in English. The parents that have Arabic, Haitian Creole, and Tagalog as their home language prefer to receive their information in English. Some of the parents that speak Spanish prefer to receive communication from the school in English as well while others want it in Spanish. Spanish Arabic Haitian-Creole 177 2 2 43.38 .49 .49 180 2 2 44.12 .49 .49 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. At the moment there is no other language besides the ones mentioned above that represent 10% of our school. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families September 2017-June 2018 Every document that is disseminate to parents is written in English and Spanish. The following is a list of documents: Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We have documents translated into Spanish by staff members within the school community. Parents of Arabic, Haitian-Creole, and Tagalog receive information in English because that's the language they selected to receive written 2018-19 SCEP-P 91  Monthly Calendars 9/7/17, 10/2/17, 11/1/17, 12/1/17, 1/2/18, 2/1/18, 3/1/18, 4/2/18, 5/1/18, 6/1/18 Parent Teacher Conference 9/8/17, 11/8/17, 3/7/18, 5/16/18 Announcements: a. After-School program information b. Trip Notices On-Going c. Invitations to Attend Meeting and Workshops These notices are sent throughout the school year d. New York State Testing Dates e. School News Letter information from the school when completing the HLIS. We have documents translated into Spanish by staff members within the school community. Parents of Arabic, Haitian-Creole, and Tagalog receive information in English because that's the language they selected to receive written information from the school when completing the HLIS. We have documents translated into Spanish by staff members within the school community. Parents of Arabic, Haitian-Creole, and Tagalog receive information in English because that's the language they selected to receive written information from the school when completing the HLIS. We have documents translated into Spanish by staff members within the school community. Parents of Arabic, Haitian-Creole, and Tagalog receive information in English because that's the language they selected to receive written information from the school when completing the HLIS. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent Teacher Conferences September 2017, November 2017 March 2018 May 2018 interpretation service(s)? Our school provides interpretation services by utilizing staff members who speak Spanish and Arabic. Staff members are present and called upon if a parent requests interpretation. If at any moment we don't have interpretation services for a given 2018-19 SCEP-P 92  Awards Assembly IEP Meetings November 2017 March 2018 On-Going September 2017, November 2017 language, we will utilize the Translation and Interpretation Unit. Please see information above Please see information above Progress & Student-Led conferences Please see information above March 2018 May 2018 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. At P.S. 151K we currently communicate with parents using the Remind App and Skedula Pupil Path. In the event of a school emergency we will use the same method of communication since it automatically translates messages into any language needed. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. In order to ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor's Regulation A-663 and the resources that are available the language access coordinator will provide an informational PD during Monday Professional Development Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) All posters which advertise the availability of translations/interpretations upon request, are posted in a central area which is visible to all parents as they walk into the building as well as in the Main Office, as per Chancellor's Regulations A-663 . The availability of translation services is announced at Parent Association (PA) meetings, through school newsletters, and posted announcements in the general office. Our school ensures that parents are provided with a meaningful opportunity to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child's education. Language identification cards, are distributed to Parents/guardians who speak another language other 2018-19 SCEP-P 93  than English. The cards identify the parent's/guardian's language so that staff members are made aware of the parent's translation needs. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? In November, during parent-teacher conference, we ask parents to complete a parent survey in order to meet their needs. Members within the school community, such as, the parent coordinator, teachers, guidance counselor, assistant principal, and parents from the PA, conduct informational workshops based on the outcome of the survey. 2018-19 SCEP-P 94 
