2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP-CS) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 32K168 School Name: THE BROOKLYN SCHOOL FOR MATH AND RESEARCH Principal: PERRY RAINEY 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Brooklyn School for Math and Research 33200011168 9, 10, 11, 12 400 Irving Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11237 School Number (DBN): 32k168 (718) 381-7100 Phone Number: (718) 381-9897 Fax: Stacy Morrison smorrison7@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Dr. Perry Rainey Chris Dakos Richlyn Fletcher Dr. Perry Rainey Richlyn Fletcher DemaliyahMcDaniel EgenMcGee n/a District Information Geographical District: 32 Superintendent’s Office Address: Richard Cintron Superintendent: 335 Adams Street, Room 504, Brooklyn, NY 11201 RCintro@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 923-5124 Phone Number: (718) 923-5145 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Affinity Schools Alexandra Anormaliza FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, NY 11201 AAnorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 935-5618 Phone Number: (718) 935-5941 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Dr. Perry Rainey Suraiyah Abdul-Wahab RichlynFletcher Carolyn Mathurin Dana Fairhurst EdenMcGee DemaliyahMcDaniel Deanna Torres Rhode Al Khani Tracy Dillard Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CSA Parent Parent Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The vision of Dr. Perry C. Rainey, the founding principal of B-SMaRt, is simply to prepare students to be successful in a 21st century society and to enter adulthood with a sense of civic responsibility.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Brooklyn School for Math and Research (B-SMaRt) is located in the Bushwick neighborhood of Brooklyn, NY. B-SMaRt is a uniform school that features an advisory program; six AP courses; a required research project; and several partnerships with local colleges and community based organizations. The B-SMaRt experience is a blueprint for an education grounded in mathematics and the humanities. The expectation is for every student to develop competence, confidence, and critical thinking skills. All are necessary components for success in both college and careers beyond high school. The rigorous curriculum and dedicated faculty and staff conspire to give scholars no choice but to demonstrate a hundred percent in all of their academic endeavors. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Approximately 15% of the school population is made up of English Language Learners (ELLs) of all levels and multiple home languages. These students are in need of ESL classes that facilitate the acquisition and mastery of the English language. Approximately 15% of the school population is made up of students with disabilities (SWDs). The specific needs of this population are addressed on a case by case basis at the school with an Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ICT) model being the primary form of service for most of our students. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. As per the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide: The elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which B-SMaRt made the most progress were: 1. 1. 1. Rigorous Instruction as evidenced by a score of 4.32 which was an increase of 0.74 in comparison to the city wide average. 2. Strong Family-Community Ties as evidenced by a score of 4.08 which was an increase of 0.87 in comparison to the city wide average. An element that will be an area of focus for this school year will be collaborative teachers. This element saw only a modest increase in comparison to the city wide average of 0.10. 0  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 32K168 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 269 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 1 1 5 11 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 8 5 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 90.0% % Attendance Rate 84.4% % Reduced Lunch 9.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 40.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 4.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7.26 5% 37% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 91% 88% 87.9% 7.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YES No N/A 42 39 1 90.4% 5.6% 19.7% 47.2% 5.6% 2.6% 6 63% 4.6 N/A N/A 87% 79% 84.8% N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A YES NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school’s strength relative to the element of Rigorous Instruction is as follows: School leaders and faculty ensure that curricula are aligned to Common Core Learning Standards and that the school embeds rigorous habits in a coherent way across all grades and subjects. This is evidenced by consistently increasing graduation rates over the last three years (2015: 77%; 2016: 80%; 2017: 89%). The school uses common assessments to create a clear picture of student progress. The vast majority of teachers use ongoing checks for understanding to make effective adjustments to meet student learning needs. The gap between college graduation rate and college readiness shrank from 29% to 4% from the 2017 cohort to the 2018 cohort. The priority need that will be addressed for this element is as follows: We looked at the percentage of students that have been graduating with an Advanced Regents Diploma over the last four years and after a one time increase three years ago, the last two years have seen a decline. Only 7.0% of the 2017 cohort graduated with the advanced designation and none of the students in the 2018 cohort earned the designation. Earning the Advanced Regents Diploma is evidence the curriculum and instruction are adequately preparing students to demonstrate proficiency in their respective subject areas. The academic rigor needed to ensure high quality supports are in place for all students are addressed through our continuous cycle of administrative observations. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019 at least 10% of the senior cohort will graduate with a NYS Advanced Regents Diploma. This will be a significant improvement in the percentage of graduates earning an advanced designation from the previous graduating cohorts of 2015, 2016, 2017, and 2018 which were 11.1%, 18.0%, 7.0%, and 0% respectively. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administrative team will identify which remaining exams students in the graduating cohort need to earn the advanced regents designation. 12th grade Students August 2018 – September 2018 APs, Teachers, and Principal n/a Students identified with having a realistic chance of earning an Advanced Regents Diploma in June will be scheduled for the courses needed to earn the designation. Where possible, students will be scheduled to sit for the state exam in January as well as in June if needed. n/a n/a n/a 12th grade Students August 2018 – September 2018 APO & Guidance Department Through the course of teaching the classes, teachers will identify all students in need of intervention to better assist them in attaining mastery of the content. Review sessions will be made available after-school and during the lunch period on a case by case basis. 12th grade students programmed for regents courses. September 2018 – May 2019 Teachers & Guidance Department n/a 3b – Parent and Family Engagement n/a n/a n/a How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. B-SMaRt will engage families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core at our annual Family Curriculum Night which is always held the first month of the school year. This year’s event will be held on September 27, 2018. Subsequently there will be student led conferences at the school on November 14th and 15th. The B-SMaRt administrative team consisting of the principal, assistant principals, and guidance office will be responsible for the implementation and oversight. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Implementation of the action plan will require: (1) Human resources: The coordination of administration, guidance, and teachers. 3  (2) Instructional Resources: Regents Prep materials. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. January 2019 will serve as the mid-year benchmark to monitor if progress is being made toward obtaining our specified goal. At this marker, where feasible, students will be scheduled to take the January regents exam or a mock regent’s assessment. Scheduling and programming adjustments to be made accordingly based on results. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) NYS Regents results. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The school’s strength relative to the element of Supportive Environment as documented in the school’s most recent Quality Review are as follows:  A highly supportive and mutually respectful learning environment results in high levels of student personal and academic growth. (1.4)  The School leaders and staff systematically communicate high expectations for all students and successfully partner with families. (3.4) The priority need that will be addressed for this element is as follows: After analyzing the data collected from a survey distributed to the student body, we found an overwhelming need for the implementation of extracurricular/co-curricular activities, in order to complete the students’ educational experience and make them active participants in shaping school culture. As a result, we have made participation in extra-curricular/co-curricular activities a priority goal for the school year starting with incoming 9th grade students. Specifically, last year we had our COSA create a spreadsheet with all of the school’s students so that we could track to see which students were involved in an extra-curricular/co-curricular activity. This year we will be able to update the spreadsheet with the incoming 9th graders and students still in the school from last year. The rationale for focusing on 9th grade students is to accelerate their identification with school as a means of retaining them at B-SMaRt as well as keeping them engaged so that they enjoy academic success their first year of high school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By April 2019, at least 60% of all incoming 9th grade students will participate in at least one extra-curricular/co-curricular activity as measured by club and or program attendance sheets. Extracurricular/co-curricular activities are defined as activities performed by students that fall outside the realm of the regular school curriculum. This can include involvement in clubs, sports, work or other pursuits that help students learn about themselves and give them new skills. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Academic Enrichment Programs Eligible students will be given an opportunity to participate in competitive pre-college programs. Partnering programs will include: CUNY Medgar Evers STEP, CUNY City Tech College Now, Liberty Partnership. Involvement With Community Based Organizations : We will leverage our relationships with Community Based Organizations in an effort to get students involved in issues that shape their community. Activities carried out with CBO’s will also expose them to new realities beyond their own life situations. Community partnerships with Make the Road New York, help support student’s extracurricular interests as well as facilitate the Community School initiative at the Bushwick Campus. PSAL Sport Teams: Eligible students will participate in campus wide PSAL sports teams including Basketball, Baseball, Volleyball, Soccer, etc. Participation in Student Clubs : Students will have the opportunity to participate in clubs that interest them. Club activities will be promoted during Advisory in order to drive participation. On-site clubs will include but are not limited to Robotics, Student Council, Wellness Council, Step Team, and Swim Club. Students will also participate in after-school campus clubs. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? October 2018 – May 2019 School Counselors, Parent Coordinator October 2018 – May 2019 Grade Advisors, School Counselors, Parent Coordinator October 2018 – May 2019 Physical Education Teacher, PSAL Coaches, Grade Advisors, School Counselors, Parent Coordinator October 2018 – May 2019 Club Coordinators, Grade Advisors, School Counselors, Parent Coordinator The top third of the student body that demonstrate academic excellence. Students who are interested in advocacy and building peer support networks. Athletic students who want to expand their peer network beyond our school. All students that are looking to develop new interests or share their current interests with others. 6  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. B-SMaRt will engage families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support their children at home by sharing the opportunities available to the students at our annual Family Curriculum Night which is always held the first month of the school year. In addition, we will make this information available on our school’s website as well as update the information in a timely fashion. Parents and guardians will also be made aware of extra-curricular options at the first round of student led conferences held on November 14th and 15th. The Assistant Principal that supervises our Coordinator of Student Activities (COSA) will be responsible for the implementation and oversight. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources – Awareness and buy-in of all identified school stake holders to help student awareness of opportunities and encourage participation in activities. In addition, we need the entire school community to inform the Counseling and Parent Coordinator departments of potential student opportunities in the school, community and outside agencies. Potential per session opportunities will be available. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. February 2019 will serve as the mid-year benchmark to monitor if progress is being made toward obtaining our specified goal. At this marker, we will survey student involvement in order to determine what additional action steps will need to be taken or adjustments that will need to be made to our plan. By February 2019, at least 30% of all incoming 9th grade students should have participated in at least one extra-curricular/co-curricular activity as measured by club and or program attendance sheets. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student Involvement Spreadsheet and/or Program Attendance Sheets that will be updated by COSA and supervised by an AP. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school’s strength relative to the element of Collaborative Teachers as documented in the school’s most recent Quality Review is as follows: The vast majority of teachers are engaged in inquiry based professional collaboration and teacher teams systematically analyze key elements of classroom practice, assessment data and student work. (4.2) The priority need that will be addressed for this element is as follows: We reviewed assessment and credit accumulation data that indicate that students in the 2019 Cohort who were in classes co-taught last year are experiencing credit gaps in their humanities courses (ELA and Social Studies). In addition, NYC Survey results showed that only 78% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the teachers at their school feel responsible that all students learn. That percentage is significantly less than the borough and city wide average of 87% for both. Since this dynamic is prevalent in the ICT and ENL classes, a closer look has to be taken at the way our students with disabilities and English Language Learners are being delivered instruction. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the percentage of ENL students from the 2020 and 2021 cohort that pass NYS Regents exams will increase from 0% to 20% as a result of collaboration amongst the Humanities Teachers, ESL Teachers and Language Paraprofessionals. Department meeting minutes will reflect the collaboration used to identify and implement strategies that will improve the academic outcomes and ultimately NYS Regents exams scores for this subgroup of students. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). An additional ENL teacher will be added to the faculty. Teachers and paraprofessionals are provided professional development every Wednesday (for 100 minutes) and on Chancellor’s Workdays. These sessions are led by members of the school’s administration and teachers. These sessions focus on providing rigorous instruction that meets the needs of all students regardless of skill level. Specific areas planned for include meeting the needs of our ENL community, providing a rigorous yet differentiated lesson, utilizing data analysis to provide targeted student-specific instruction based on ENL student’s weaknesses and providing options for both push-in and pull-out models. Every Wednesday after school, teachers will meet in teams and or departments for 100 minutes. During these meetings, the administrator that oversees the team or department provides insight into current happenings, shares best practices that have worked during their instruction, analyzes the data that has been accumulated from recent assessments, etc. Having Humanities and ENL Teachers use this time to co-plan will allow teachers a more targeted approach to enhancing student achievement for our ELL students. One AP will be sent to a variety of trainings throughout the year to stay current on the necessary elements needed to produce high quality lesson plans and plan effective Teachers September 2018-May 2019 Teachers Administration September 2018-May 2019 Teachers Administration September 2018-May 2019 9 instruction for ENL students to gain English language acquisition. ENL teachers are sent to trainings to learn best practices and instructional strategies to improve the academic outcomes for ELL students. In turn, these teachers return to turnkey what they learned at these sessions to the entire staff at school wide sessions. Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement September 2018-May 2019 Administration and teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. B-SMaRt will engage families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and promoting teacher-parent collaborations at our annual Family Curriculum Night which will be held on September 27, 2018. Subsequently, this information will be reinforced at the monthly SLT/PA meetings held on the last Tuesday of each month. The B-SMaRt administrative team consisting of the principal and assistant principals will be responsible for the implementation and oversight. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In order to implement the strategies listed in the action plan, we will need the following resources: (1) Human resources: We will utilize our administration and teachers where needed with regard to leading and/or attending training sessions, meetings, etc. The point person(s) from our Affinity Group will also serve as human resources for providing information to the teachers sent to their respective trainings. (2) Instructional Resources: The instructional resources that accompany the Read 180 Program are provided by Scholastic. The instructional resources provided during NYSAA trainings are provided by the DOE and/or our Affinity Group. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 0  In February 2019, a review of the school’s credit gap spreadsheet, exported from the New Visions Portal, will be conducted to assess the progress of this goal. At this point, the number of credit gaps should be reduced by at least 12 credits from 115 to 103. This is little more than a 10% reduction in the number of credit gaps for our 2020 cohort. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. New Visions Portal Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school’s strength relative to the element of Effective School Leadership as documented in the school’s most recent Quality Review and NYC School Survey are as follows:  School leaders and staff systematically communicate high expectations for all students and successfully partner with families. The school’s commitment to effective and consistent communication to students, families and staff regarding expectations for learning ensure a cohesive roadmap to reach higher levels of achievement. (3.4)  94% of teachers say that the principal communicates a clear vision for the school and that curriculum and instruction is well coordinated across different grade levels  94% of teachers say the principal knows what is going on in their classrooms. The priority need that will be addressed for this element is as follows: The NYC School Survey results showed that only 78% of teachers feel that the principal is setting clear expectations for them to implement what they have learned in professional development. That percentage is significantly less than the borough and city wide average of 85% and 83% respectively. Hence, the need to have teachers take ownership of the professional development experience. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By May of 2019, the principal will facilitate at least one department meeting each quarter for all of the academic and operational departments in the school. Those departments currently include Humanities, Math & Science, SPED, ENL, AVID Implementation Team, Attendance Team, Dean’s Office, and COSA Office. As a result of this the overall school survey will improve to the city wide average of 83%. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Bi-weekly administrative cabinet meeting with APs will monitor the progress of school’s Read 180 Program; lunch time tutoring; Advanced Placement classes; instructional protocols in the classroom; and identify appropriate use of professional meeting topics for faculty development. Weekly school youth development meeting with APO, Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator, and Dean’s Office. Topics for PD will be explored and potential faculty facilitators will be identified. Reflection pages will be used at the conclusion of weekly professional development sessions to monitor faculty pedagogical needs. This will inform which teachers should be used to lead future PD sessions. Assistant Principals Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Principal APO, Dean, Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator Teachers Principal Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Principal Sept. 2018 to June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. B-SMaRt will engage families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and promoting parent leadership at the monthly SLT/PA meetings held on the last Tuesday of each month. The principal will be responsible for the implementation and oversight. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources to be used will be administrators and faculty members. Instructional resources will be identified on an as needed basis. No schedule adjustments are currently necessary. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 3  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019, a review of the school’s professional development log and team/department meeting minutes will be conducted to assess the progress of this goal. At this point, the principal will have facilitated at least 16 team/department meetings. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Professional Development Log and/or department meeting minutes Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school’s strength relative to the element of Strong Family and Community Ties as documented from B-SMaRt’s most recent NYC School Survey results are as follows:  95% of parents feel that school staff regularly communicate with them about how they can help their child learn.  98% of parents agree/strongly agree that they are treated warmly when they call or visit the school.  98% of parents feel like their child’s school communicates with them in a language and in a way that they can understand. The priority need that will be addressed for this element is as follows: Increasing overall parent involvement. Specifically, parent attendance at Parent Association Meetings. There has been a decline in parent attendance the last three years and research bears out that there is a strong positive correlation between parent involvement and the academic achievement of their children. The percentage of parents of students that failed 2 or more classes and did not participate in the November or March Student Led Conferences (SLC) was 57%. This stated otherwise, means 43% of this subgroup of parents did attend the November or March SLC. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By April of 2019, the percentage of parents of students that failed 2 or more classes that participate in the November or March Student Led Conferences (SLC) will increase 43% to 53%. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Curriculum Night: The school will host a curriculum night for parents the first month of the school year. Curriculum night will provide parents with an opportunity to meet with faculty and staff members and inquire about the course expectations for their children as well as receive pertinent information for academic success. All B-SMaRt parents and prospective parents Sept. 2018 Parent Coordinator & Guidance Counselors Student Data Workshops: B-SMARt will regularly provide parents with access to student data so that parents can work with their child to set specific and targeted academic goals. At workshops parents will receive training and materials in understanding PupilPath and how to hold their child accountable. All B-SMaRt Parents Sept. 2018 to April 2019 Parent Coordinator Annual Title I Parent Meeting: B-SMARt will host its Annual Title I Parent Meeting where they will inform parents of the school’s Title I identification status; inform parents of their right to know about the professional qualifications of their child’s teacher. All B-SMaRt parents Sept. 2018 to November 2018 Parent Coordinator & Principal Monthly Parent Newsletter: B-SMaRt parents will receive a monthly newsletter via mail and electronically alerting them of upcoming events as well as regularly scheduled SLT and PA meetings. All B-SMaRt parents Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Make the Road NY is a CBO that supports the school with family and community engagement. The school also has a partnership with Volunteers of Legal Services (VOLS) which provides free legal help to family members of students that are registered at the school. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. An additional resource used to facilitate this goal will be the use of the school’s website; social media and maximizing the use of the school’s phone messenger system. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 6  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By November 2018, the percentage of parents of students that failed 2 or more classes and attended the November SLC will be at least 50%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student Led Conference attendance sheets for November 2018. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Assessments and Teacher Evaluations Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Revising, Sentence Starters, Prompting Elicit Information, Videos, Academic Talk, PowerPoint, Text, Articles, Supplemental Notes Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group, Individual Instruction, Tutoring, Peer Assistance Two periods of Global History per week is devoted to interdisciplinary instruction with ELA. During the school day differentiated instruction and inquiry and project based is provided to support the varying learning levels. Additional small group tutoring is available four days a week during lunch. All ninth grade students receive 144 minutes of mathematics instruction during each school day. During the school day differentiated instruction and inquiry and project based is provided to Mathematics Assessments and Teacher Evaluations Guided Notes, Videos, Graphic Organizers, Kinetics, Scaffolding, Chunking Small group, Individual Instruction, Tutoring, Peer Assistance 8  Science Assessments and Teacher Evaluations Guided Notes, Videos, Graphic Organizers, Lab experiments Small group, Individual Instruction, Tutoring, Peer Assistance Social Studies Assessments and Teacher Evaluations Guided Notes, Videos, Graphic Organizers Small group, Individual Instruction, Tutoring, Peer Assistance support the varying learning levels. During the school day small group tutoring for students who failed math the first marking period is available from math teachers. During the school day differentiated instruction and inquiry and project based is provided to support the varying learning levels. Additional small group tutoring is available four days a week during lunch. During lunch and every day after school Physics tutoring is available. Tuesdays and Thursdays tutoring in all other science areas are available. During lunch tutoring is available for all areas in social studies. Mondays and Thursdays after school U.S. History Regents Prep is 9  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Assessments, Family Referrals and Teacher Evaluations Daily conduct sheets and student-led conferences One-to-one or small group counseling available for senior students. All at-risk students meet with the school counselor once per week to check in on short and long term academic goals and strategies collaboratively set to improve in their classes. All at-risk students meet with the school counselor weekly to receive their daily conduct sheets. Mandated special need students meet with school counselor as per IEP mandates. At-risk students receive outside counseling referrals to Mental Health agencies as needed. 0  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 28 students are currently in temporary housing and attending B-SMaRt. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Title I funds will be set aside for Students in Temporary Housing to pay for basic and emergency supplies such as uniforms, school supplies, books, and eye glasses if needed Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 1  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified.  Principal regularly attends hiring fairs to identify and recruit highly qualified teachers in all subject areas capable of running activities that will expose students to various post-secondary options. First and second year teachers are assigned mentors to help support their instructional practice.  2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). All teachers are provided professional development opportunities. Specifically: Overall school PD * Professional development will focus on modeling and implementing strategies to improve teacher collaboration in the classroom. * PD sessions for staff re-enforce the school’s instructional focus: Students will answer essential questions by articulating their reasoning with supporting evidence both verbally and in writing. * B-SMaRt’s faculty receives at least 100 minutes of professional development every Wednesday of the school year. Topics included in the PD are geared towards strengthening teacher capacity for having productive inquiry meetings by working in professional learning communities. o PD for teacher teams * Teams within departments receive PD to develop their pedagogy around competencies of the Danielson Framework for Teaching; specifically, components 1e, 3b, 3c, and 3d. o PD for individual teachers 3  * Individual teachers will receive PD based on areas in need of improvement or strengths that could be made even better as indicated through classroom observation data. PD offered through the Superintendent’s Office and the Boro Support Center will be utilized to facilitate professional development for individual teachers. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. By working in professional learning communities, B-SMaRt’s faculty make decisions regarding the selection and use of assessment measures in the classroom. Teachers have common planning time to work in departments and examine student work to drive the direction of their instruction. This examination of student work is the fuel behind proposals, adjustments and revisions to formative and summative assessments. Every Wednesday, students are dismissed two periods earlier and the opportunity is there for at least 100 minutes of professional development or time to work in professional learning communities. Topics included in the PD focus on using assessment in instruction as described in Danielson’s framework for teaching as well as using questioning and discussion techniques to formatively assess student learning. Teachers have an equitable role on B-SMaRt’s Measures of Student Learning (MOSL) committee. This committee consists of teachers and school administrators whom collectively decide on the most effective assessments to use school wide to determine student academic progress over the course of the year. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools 4  Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Local 215,259.00 0 0 0 2,326,930.00 X N/A N/A X X 12, 14, 17, 19, & 21 12, 14, 17, 19, & 21 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages: 5   Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 6  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The Brooklyn School for Math and Research (B-SMaRt), in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students B-SMaRt will support parents and families of Title I students by:  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality 7  The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association, as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before October 30th of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help;    Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by:  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Student-Led Conferences and throughout the school year; 8  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC)  The Brooklyn School for Math and Research, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;  using academic learning time efficiently;    offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA);  I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by:     conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to October 30th of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; 9   providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;   providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year;  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff  member; arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Student-Led Conferences Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents  creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians;  hosting a curriculum night the first month of school to assist parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend);  provide parents with a monthly newsletter to share and communicate best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   hosting an Annual Title I Parent Meeting and ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement  are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Parent/Guardian Responsibilities II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary;  0 read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games;    promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;   participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;   become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child   Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities       attend school regularly and arrive on time; complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; show respect for myself, other people and property; try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; always try my best to learn. 1  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? As part of the Community School initiative, we have been focusing on building students academic, leadership and critical thinking skills. Bushwick Campus offers a variety of outlets that expose students to these three pillars of student growth. Through different community building events, students will have exposure to workshops that focus on mentoring, post-secondary options, creative writing and storytelling, as well as the exposure of other partner organizations that promote empowerment and youth leadership. All of which will become outlets for students to expand and develop their confidence as young leaders in their school community. By raising student voice and building student leadership in our school campus, we are able to support a platform where students can feel empowered to participate and engage in their academic instruction. Students will be able to demonstrate ownership of their own academic progress as its connects to afterschool activities, community events and staff developed curriculum. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. As part of the Community School initiative, we look forward to embark in the 2018-2019 year and support BSMART in different goals that build youth leadership and critical thinking skills. 1. Support and collaborate with school staff to create a Senior Internship Project that will run for four weeks between May and June. This initiative will provide a structured learning experience, community involvement and exploration of possible career choices. This will ultimately support an increase in attendance for seniors who have seen a dip during the month of June and focus on critical leadership skills and personal development. 2. Make the Road New York will continue to collaborate with school administration to support their staff professional development through the connection of various trainings. These will also include open staff trainings for all teachers in Bushwick Campus. Training sessions include but may not be limited to topics that address different student behaviors in classrooms, creating community building in schools and ways to build narrative through storytelling. 3. Support school staff with year round student celebrations and activities that include but are not limited to high attendance, cultural celebrations, student community engagement. As part of the Community School initiative, we will support with at least 5 student celebrations and activities. 4. Make the Road will provide college access support through the Student Success Center (MRNY College Access Program) by pushing into classes to co-facilitate lessons for students around early college planning and awareness, choosing the right school, writing a personal statement, and completing all aspects of the application package. MRNY SSC staff will also work with BSMART students during lunch and after school. The SSC will support 85% of graduating BSMART seniors apply to six colleges or more. 5. Make the Road school based team will support BSMART and their parent coordinator in the outreach plans for their monthly school meetings. We will also support the parent coordinator and other BSMART staff with providing resources for parents on the different community services that are offered by MRNY, as well as providing workshop support for topics chosen by parents and staff that address their interests. 6. As part of the collaborative team, MRNY will continue to support attendance school wide initiatives with the support of the community school based team through, community building circles with students, one on one mental health support, collaboration with parent coordinator on family engagement support and all other 2 after school community building activities that promote leadership building and personal growth for students. 7. Attendance Improvement: By November 15th, at least 200 chronically absent students and at risk students (across the four schools) will have been assigned to the MRNY social worker, the MRNY Restorative Justice Coordinator, a school staff mentor, a MRNY social work intern, or a community school Youth Ambassador who will assess strengths to draw on and needs to be met and will ensure that students are receiving appropriate services and participating in community building events. At least 40 students from BSMART will be a part of a case load and or mentor group of MRNY staff. These students will miss fewer days than the previous year and our progress will be measured monthly. 8. College Access: By February 2019, 86% of graduating seniors will apply to six or more colleges and 75% of those students will apply for financial aid. By May, 2019 80% of 9th and 10th grade students will participate in early college awareness workshops. By May 2019 80% of 11th grade students will complete a college list and personal statement, and 80% of 10th and 11th grade students will attend a college and career fair. By August of 2019, 75% of graduated seniors who applied to college will be ready to matriculate on their first day. 9. Youth Leadership and Community Building: Our campus cohort of 8 Youth Ambassadors will coordinate and implement monthly community building events also contributing to the increase in perceived positive school climate. The two BSMART Youth Ambassadors will have monthly check ins with school administration to collaborate on plans for enhancing student voice and engagement in the broader school community. 10. Family Engagement: We will see an increase in family engagement both in and outside of the school. This will be measured by an increase from last year in the number of parents who visit the school, attend events, home visits and connect with over the phone. We will support BSMART with at least 10 home visits for students that fall in any of the following attendance categories, at risk, chronically absent and severely chronically absent. A minimum of 25 parents will attend our community school forum in the spring. 11. Health and Wellness: At least 50% of students will access our new school based health center for health services. 85% of students will be screened for vision and all those who need them will receive free glasses. At least 50 students across Bushwick Campus will receive free dental services and or referrals to see a dentist. 12. Connect at least 60% of students with vision and dental services through both the School Based Health Clinic and or Warby Parker. 13. Connect 85% of families and students to the School Health Based Center- Gotham Health Center. 14. We will collaborate with school’s staff to provide families who seek an attorney for legal support through at least 3 free legal clinics in the school and connect with our Community Engagement Coordinator for access to services such as ESL classes and public benefits application support and Health Insurance . 15. Overall our vision and goal is to continue to progress on our path to creating a school campus where all who enter feel love and supported, are committed to justice, and are able to reach their own full potential. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? Every student that walks into the school building will be seen as a young person that is cared for being held accountable to reach their highest potential. Through collaboration, teamwork and supporting staff, students and families will feel empowered to be successful in their school and the broader community The campus wide events, expanded learning time, attendance initiatives, family engagement events and the health and wellness center will provide a platform for students and families to access resources, develop leadership and ultimately create a positive, trusting learning environment. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan 3  Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal CBO Partnership MRNY Target Population Students at risk for poor attendance. Mentoring, group facilitations, one on one counseling, YA’s support Increase attendance by 2% for students in the chronically absent cohort and at risk cohort. Provide at least 4 community building events for their peers. Goal #3,6,7,15 Provide resources for families and students around reproductive health and other related health education topics. Connect families and students to primary care in the school. Goal #11, #12, #13 Gotham Health Center All students Free primary and preventive care Physical examinations Immunizations Working papers and sports physicals Screenings for vision, asthma, obesity, tuberculosis and other conditions Treatment for chronic illnesses Prescribing and dispensing medications First aid care Emergency care Parent and guardian health education Risk-reduction education Special needs health care referrals. 4  MOTH All students Reproductive and sexual health services Mental health care Eye exams Dental care. Leadership skills through the art of storytelling MRNY/Action NYC Students and families facing immigration challenges One on one legal counseling support for families and students Create an outlet for creative expression through the art of storytelling. Provide self confidence and leadership tools during after school. Two separate 8 week sessions, one in the Fall and one in the Spring. Goal #6,7,15 Increase access to legal counseling to school population by providing legal aid to families and students. Provide at least 3 free legal clinics and quarterly Know Your Rights workshops for Bushwick Campus. Goa #14,15 Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The Community School Program will include additional personnel such as Social Work interns to support family home visits, support in the implementation of attendance initiatives, provide extra resources and hands on work for students in need of guidance through one on one sessions, as well as larger campus initiatives that will support the students in their journey to their success. Additional resources such as supplemental enrichment activities in the form of ELT, trips for team building purposes will be funded. Through collaboration, Professional Development for teachers to enhance instruction and provide social emotional supports will be provided to all teachers across all four high schools in the form of community building capacity events. The Community School program will be working very closely with all four schools and their staff, predominately Parent Coordinators and other members of school staff that aid in providing a welcoming environment for incoming 9th grade families as well the entire school community. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 5  X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. 1. With our new Community School Director, Sonia Sendoya, and the Assistant Community School Director, will work in collaboration with school staff to provide the supports needed to implement the work on the school campus. The CSD and the ACSD as well as the school based team will focus on implementing structures that will support students and staff through data collection, family engagement meetings, one on one meetings with administration and other staff members of the school community. Part of this role will also contribute in building leadership skills to the Youth Ambassadors that will work in collaboration with other school based teams to create leadership development in their respective school. The CSD, Sonia Sendoya, will convene quarterly community school provider meetings with other CBO’s and guidance staff to ensure that clear communication and a streamlined coordination of services is happening. The Assistant Community School Director will be point person to the school and will report to the CSD and will work in collaboration to ensure that all support systems are taken into account and stakeholders are in constant communication with each other. The CSD will collaborate with the school to provide adequate resources and will continue to check in with administration to ensure that all aspects of the work is being fulfilled. 2. We will use a mix of quantitative and qualitative data analysis to ensure that the supports that were outlined in our SMART goals are taken into consideration and checked in throughout the year. For example, we use the data sorter from New Visions to filter for a specific attendance trend, then go student by student and have counselors, administration, and CBO staff who know each student give their input as to the challenges the student is facing and ideas for support. We will seamlessly coordinate services by convening regular meetings with school leadership and staff as well as partner CBO’’s in the building – to ensure all are on the same page, referral processes are understood, and a clear schedule is put in place. We will also hold internal staff meetings to create protocols that will focus on communication and support systems. In addition, we will also process through reflection meetings with administration, staff and students to improve the services and 6  the structures implemented the year before and enhance the way we work together as a team to reach our goals. 3. The CSD, ACSD and Community Engagement Coordinator will convene monthly community school team meetings. The Youth Ambassadors will coordinate monthly community building events. Our Student Success Center Staff will offer quarterly parent workshops on financial aid and the college process, all of which will be done through the collaboration of MRNY and the school staff. To increase family attendance in these meetings, Youth Ambassadors will facilitate workshops and conduct outreach in the lunchroom, and then facilitate one on ones with interested students. MRNY Community Engagement Coordinator will train parent leaders in outreach and organizing. Those leaders will then make phone calls, do door knocking, and facilitate one on ones with interested parents. We will offer leadership training for parents with Make the Road New York and the Coalition for Educational Justice. We will connect parents to English classes and workshops to develop skills. Our Community Engagement Coordinator will have one on one sessions with parents to discuss goals and strategies to support their students. Our Youth Advocate, LMSW will also connect with parents of students from cohort and invite parents to the school (or do home visits when necessary) to set goals along with their child and sit in on classes from time to time to understand better what the students are learning. 4. Each Principal, the CSD and the ACSD will check in one on one several times a week, and meet along with the other three Principals in the building once a month for a longer meeting to discuss the campus community school strategy. Each attendance team meets weekly and actively uses the New Visions data sorter to track attendance trends and progress of targeted students. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 1. The Brooklyn School for Math and Research will continue to work with Make the Road New York (MRNY), a community based organization located in Bushwick with deep roots and history in the community. Make the Road New York builds the power of Latino and working class communities to achieve dignity and justice through organizing, policy innovation, and survival services. The Community School Director (CSD), Sonia Sendoya is a Social Worker dedicated to support students and families to engage them in their school community. The Assistant Community School Director will also be involved in supporting the school with post-secondary resources and mentoring support for 12th grade seniors. The CSD will be involved in the day to day operations of attendance initiatives, parent engagement and community initiatives that the school and the Bushwick Campus will create for the new 2018-2019 school year. She will play a key role in supporting the staff at The Brooklyn School for Math and Research by collaborating with but not limited to working with other CBO’s such as the MOTH Program, Interborough, Action NYC. 2. The Community School Team employees include an Assistant Community School Director who will support the CSD in all of the Bushwick Campus initiatives, they will also oversee the Student Success Center which focuses on post-secondary education. In addition to the CSD and ACSD, MRNY employs a Community Engagement Coordinator to outreach to and engage students, staff, and families in the initiative as well as outreach to middle schools to boost enrollment in the upcoming school year; a Youth Advocate (also an LMSW) will provide counseling, mentoring, and advocacy to chronically absent students. A Student Success Center College Advocate who both provide college access services and early college awareness activities to all students and families. Last but not least the Restorative Justice Coordinator also part of the Community School Team will support the school campus to improve school climate and facilitate restorative justice 7  activities, as well as advocate for students who have received summonses during school time. Students will be given the opportunity to meet one on one with someone from the community school staff to assess needs and connect them to the appropriate services and programs. These programs and services include but are not limited to an on-site mental health clinic, and on-side health clinic, on-site vision and dental screenings, on and off-site legal services, academic enrichment activities, and adult education classes. Students will receive appropriate follow up case management, counseling, and mentoring according to need. MRNY will connect students to after school programming in the areas of youth leadership and civic engagement as well as field trips that give students the opportunity to engage in a range of academic and extracurricular activities. The community school initiative will also build on MRNY’s existing Student Success Center, a college access program that provides high quality peer to peer counseling through all aspects of the college process beginning with early college awareness and moving all the way through to matriculation. All stakeholders in the Community School Team will be in constant communication will their respective supervisors and will also be integrated in monthly meetings with administration, internal community school team meetings, attendance meetings and once a month meetings with administration to ensure proper clarity in work and feedback on the continued support. 3. Through planning meetings with school administration and MRNY, New Visions data tools will be used to create spreadsheets that will inform which students will be targeted during the school year. There will be different attendance incentives that will be used for students who are in all four categories, chronically absent, severely chronically absent, not at risk and at risk. These cohorts will drive attendance meetings and essentially will be the focus of strategic attendance initiatives. With the support of BSMART staff, MRNY staff will track all data on student and family involvement and access to services and programs as well as attendance data. School staff will compare this data to any change in attendance and other student achievement. In addition, the CSD will work with school staff to hold monthly meetings in which parents and families learn of the services available on campus at MRNY’s community center. The CSD will also work with school community team and the schools’ parent coordinator to conduct workshops that they feel will be important for parents to learn and understand topics may include navigating the school system, school policy and other issues of interest, immigration and college access. The CSD and Parent Coordinator will publicize school events and coordinate with one of the social workers to provide one on one case management with families addressing goals; legal, health, adult literacy, and workforce service referral to MRNY; and other service referrals. Families will be engaged through phone calls, home visits, community tours and outreach. Families will be engaged through services but also as volunteers leading recreational, vocational, or academic enrichment activities, as decision makers, and mobilizers of peers and neighborhood institutions. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. The Community School Program will include additional personnel such as Social Work interns to support civic engagement projects as well as personnel from MRNY home base. Additional resources such as supplemental enrichment activities in the form of ELT, trips for team building purposes will be funded. Professional Development for teachers to enhance instruction and provide social emotional supports will be given to teachers as well. The Community School program will be working very closely with staff to provide a welcoming environment for incoming 9th grade families as well the entire school community. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. 8  Community School Program will start in July 2018 and will continue throughout the 2018-2019 school year. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 9  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 32 School Name The Brooklyn School for Math and Resear Borough select one School Number 168 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Dr. Perry Rainey Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Madeline Dierker/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Tichena Rose/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Samantha Giarratani/ENL Related-Service Provider N/A Superintendent Donald Conyers Assistant Principal Deanna Torres Coach N/A School Counselor Jacintha Mondesir Parent Ms. Folk Parent Coordinator N/A Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 0  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 270 Total number of ELLs 29 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 10.74% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): N/A If yes, indicate language(s): N/A Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 K 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 3 0 4 0 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The school uses teacher-created assessments to assess the phonemic, morphological and lexile levels for our ELL students. These assessments provide data regarding students' literacy, social and academic language and critical reading skills which informs what scaffolds and differentiation the teachers provide as well as what classroom materials are given to the student. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Resources and instructional strategies were provided by the school's chief professional development facilitator from CPET. She also offered ideas regarding data collection and data analysis. 1  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Teachers provided baseline diagnostic exams to ELL students in the first week of school to gather data as to where they are beginning. This data is referenced throughout the year as unit assessments are given and mid-year and end of year assessments are provided. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Students participate in integrated content classes by grade. These cohorts travel together throughout the day as a block, except for daily advisory in which ungraded ENL's of mixed proficiency levels receive literacty and language support. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Teachers use data to assess what instructional materials ENLs need to support and sustain their involvement in content area classes. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Outcome assessments from the NYSESLAT, NYSITELL and subject area Regents exam data are used to guide instruction for the areas our ENL students struggle. These assessments drives the assessment for how well our programs are serving the ENL's in our community. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? N/A Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Students participate in integrated content classes by grade. These cohorts travel together throughout the day as a block, except for daily advisory in which ungraded ENL's of mixed proficiency levels receive literacty and language support. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ELL's receive ENL, ELA and HLA services through ELA content material. Students read fiction and nonfiction texts in English and their Home Language, if they are literate in their HL. The school provides a collaborative teaching model and an integrated model to ensure the LRE and language support for academic and social literacy. 2  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Students are strengthening their writing and reading skills by citing textual evidence in order to meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The prompts are written primarily in English and translated for comprehensiveion purposes for ELLs into Spanish, Arabi, or Haitain Creole. Texts are also available in different languages in order to accommodate their comprehension needs in class to support and direct their writing in English. The ESL teacher works collaboratively with content teachers to scaffold the lesson, so the materials may be different but ultimately the outcome is the same for all students. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELLs practice their HL throughout the school year through projects, essays and other activities to ensure opportunity of participating and expanding their HL. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status SIFE's are supported through counselor and teacher intervention to integrate them into the school and classroom culture as quickly as possible through language classes which demonstrate the purposes and procedures of the school. Newcomer ELLs are provided materials in their HL and English, and are evaluated in their HL. Their assignments are not required in English until they have received their ENL services. Developing ELLs are provided most materials in scaffolded English with language supports for writing and speaking in English. Long Term ELLs instruction is targeted toward promoting literacy skills to implement in content area classes. Former ELL instruction is targeted toward promoting literacy skills to implement in content area classes while they develop their academic English. Former ELLs receive services through collaborative teaching efforts in their ELA classroom. They receive extended time on tests and supplemental materials in their native language (glassaries, bilingual dictionaries, etc.). 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Instructional strategies for ELL-SWD's include but are not limited to condensed versions of texts, translated texts, modified activities that enhance the English vocabulary, graphic organizers and scaffolded lesson plans that provide access to content, so students will be able to understand the process in order to create the final product that demonstrates understanding of the lesson. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Curricular: Students are provided with texts for the curriculum and lessons are aligned to meet the Common Core Learning Standards. ELL-SWDs are able to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment as the curriculum is designed to cover topics such as citing textual evidence, analyzing a text, and other basic literacy skills that will help them develop their writing and reading skills. Students take all content classes within the least restrictive environment. Instructional: ELL-SWDs are provided with scaffolded lessons along with the assistance of the ESL and Special Education Teacher. Graphic organizers are prepared, with the translation necessary, in order for students to access the content.Scheduling Flexibility: Students are given one extra period (45 minutes) for ELA remediation and are also available to meet with the teacher after school for review. ELL-SWDs are provided with the appropriate amount of time for classwork and 3  exams. Time may be extended for ELL-SWDs in order to ensure accurate scores. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. We provide all ELLs the opportunity to partake in structured afterschool and lunch-time tutoring programs in targeted content areas based on need. All tutoring intervention programs are offered in English. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? The current program is currently adapting to meet the needs of more ELLs in content area classes, especially as our population of students increases. Students will be receiving more push-in services to support literacy in content area classes. Additionally, we will be looking at additional interventions needed to target our increasingly large population of newcoming ELLs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are given equal access to all school wide curricular and extra-curricular programs. These programs include Advisory, Robotics, Swim Club, Student Government, etc. ELLs are given encouragement by their ENL and general education teachers, and counselors to attend daily lunch-time tutoring to receive additional assistance in their core subject area classes. In addition, students and families receive ongoing information and alerts about extra-curricular programs offered and college workshops via phone messenger, signs posted around the building, calls home, classroom announcements and postings on the B-SMARt website. Supplemental services offered to ELLs include college application and financial aid workshops facilitated by our building community based organization (CBO), Make The Road New York. The campus also offers counseling (individual and family) with a clinical social worker for those who are having attendance issues. In addition, many of our families utilize the free legal services offered by VOCES for issues of housing and immigration. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. ELLs have the use of bilingual dictionaries, English dictionaries, thesaurus, lap tops with literacy programs such as ESL Reading Smart to support literacy in ENL and content classrooms. Subgroups are provided texts in Spanish, Arabic or Creole. Content glossaries are used in content area classes. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In ENL and content area classes, students are provided literature, school notes, and nonfiction in their home language to support continued literacy in that language. In ELA classrooms, students who are preliterate in their home language are paired with students who are literate in that language. These collaborative groups meet weekly to make meaning of a book and discuss literary terms, techniques, vocabulary and thematic ideas in both English and the home language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. ELLs receive their services with other students of their own age and grade level. If a student needs additional services, they may participate in a heterogenous, ungraded ENL classroom while other students in the school meet in their advisory group. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? ELLs are given equal access to all building wide programs and services offered. Resources include college application and access workshops facilitated by our community based (CBO), Make The Road New York. All students are able to receive socioemotional support through our partnership with Interborough which provides individual and family counseling services. In addition, many of our families utilize the free legal services offered by VOCES for issues of housing and immigration. 4  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). ELL students get an opportunity to be acclimated with the school structure, protocols and study skills during the summer bridge program that all incoming students are invited to attend in August. During the year, the ENL teacher, School Counselors and general education teachers collaboratively work to inform students of the tutoring support and afterschool activities and programs available at the school. In addition, the ENL teacher also acts as an advisor to the ELL students. In this role the students are provided with tips on activities they can do independently to help them continue to develop their reading, listening and writing skills during the year and in anticipation of the upcoming school year. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Chinese is the only language elective offered to all students at the school. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The ENL teacher attends a series of Professional Developments outside of our school with other ELL professionals, where they learn how to create rigorous curriculum and strategic ways to support and prepare ELLs for the English Language Arts Regents. The ENL turn keys all information learned during the Professional Development offered by our Affinity Group that she has attended with the school staff (Principal, Guidance Counselor, ELL Coordinator, Content Area Teachers) during our weekly Wednesday school wide Professional Developments facilitated by Teachers College of Columbia University. The Professional Development facilitated by Teachers College helps teachers modify their curriculum and lesson plans, so that they can be sure to include entry points for ELLs as they engage in Common Core Learning Standards. The facilitator works with staff during these sessions to differentiate the content and process. In addition, teachers have received training on how to use "READ 180" program to facilitate small group instruction to help students strengthen their decoding and encoding skills, phonemic awareness, and overall literacy development. In READ 180, studentes work on their reading comprehension, spelling and grammar collectively. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our school meets the professional development requirement as per CR Part 154.2. Fifteen percent of total hours for teachers are spent on weekly professional developments through our partnership with CPET Teacher's College at Columbia University. These sessions are used to address strategies for effectively working with ELLs. One out of six professional developments are geared towards the advancement of ELL students by the ELL provider. Fifty percent of total hours the bilingual education/ENL teacher receives ELL-specific training by attending professional developments specifically for ELL professionals offered by our Affinity Group. Records for in house professional development activities are obtained when each staff member signs in, follows the pre-populated agenda and completes CPET activities. Outside professional developments are recorded by the request to 5  administration to attend, retrieval of the specific professional development agenda, and/or professional development materials. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The Brooklyn School for Math and Research invites returning students to attend an annual individual meeting with parents of ELLs at the start of the school year to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, NYSESLAT langugae proficiency assessment results and academic progress in all content areas. During the school year and at least once a month, during our monthly Parent Association meetings, parents of ELLs also have an opportunity to attend and ask any questions or submit concerns they may have during the year. These meetings also have parents of multi-language abilities to assist. if more translation is needed, we do contant the DOE's Translation and Interpretation Unit if applicable. Our Guidance department also encourages all families to make appointments during the year to assist in the individual assessment process. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. During the school year and at least once a month, during our monthly Parent Association meetings, parents of ELLs also have an opportunity to attend and ask any questions or submit concerns they may have during the year. These meetings also have parents of multi-language abilities to assist. if more translation is needed, we do contant the DOE's Translation and Interpretation Unit if applicable. Our Guidance department also encourages all families to make appointments during the year to assist in the individual assessment process. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 6 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Perry Rainey, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 7  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Brooklyn School for Math a School DBN: 32K168 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Dr. Perry Rainey Title Principal Deanna Torres Assistant Principal N/A Parent Coordinator Madeline Dierker ENL/Bilingual Teacher N/A Parent Tichena Rose/ELA/SPED Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A N/A Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Jacintha Mondesir School Counselor N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other N/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 8  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 32K168 School Name: Brooklyn School Math and Research Superintendent: Conyers The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Elizabeth Ruiz Pupil Personnel Secretary No; LAC will attend in the Fall of 2017 Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. When assessing language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication, B-SMARt uses a variety of methods to survey Parent information. From ATS, we are able to use the code HLIS; from student emergency cards, we can access preferred language. We also send home letters in English, Chinese, and Spanish, encouraging parents to update the school of any important changes We also use Parent Volunteers to make outreach calls to gauge Parent information. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 9  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral The code in ATS - RPOB - collects the Place of Birth, Language and Geo report. From this report, we are able to gather that our families prefer the following languages: Spanish, English, Arabic, Haitian, French, Mandarin, Romanian, and Cantonese. N/A N/A N/A Spanish (15%) Spanish (15%) Spanish (15%) Spanish (15%) Arabic (1%) Arabic (1%) Arabic (1%) Arabic (1%) Creole (2%) Creole (2%) Creole (2%) Creole (2%) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Spanish Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Mid-June Mid-June October, March December, May Ongoing Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Bilingual Faculty assist with translation services. Big-Word Interpretation Services Bilingual Faculty assist with translation services. Bilingual Faculty assist with translation services. Big-Word Interpretation Services Summer expectations letters New Student orientation/Summer Homework Parent-teacher conference announcements Regents testing dates flyer Parent Association letters. Parent Association letters are distributed every two months (starting in August), with newsletters with current events and activities to encourage family engagement. 0  N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide The formal face-to-face meetings that B-SMARt typically has with parents throughout the school year consists of: November/April Ongoing interpretation service(s)? Bilingual Faculty as well as staff from the Translation and Interpretation Unit assist with translation. Bilingual Faculty as well as staff from the Translation and Interpretation Unit assist with translation. Student-Led Conferences (November/April) Curriculum night (October) Senior Graduation in Doubt meetings (September). Other informal interactions happen daily, which consist of Guidance Counselors, Pupil Personnel, Secretary, Attendance teachers and the Parent Coorinator making outreach for school incidences, student progress updates and various school-related opportunities. Informal counseling sessions also occur on a daily basis when families come to B-SMARt inquiring about services. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. B-SMARt ensures that all staff members are aware of translation services and over-the-phone interpretation services during Staff meetings, emails, and information guides located in the Staff Lounge. In the case of a school emergency, designated staff will make outreach via phone to inform limited-English-proficient families of the situation. In instances were a faculty member does not speak the language, we will use over the phone interpreation services provided by the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit. 1  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. B-SMARt ensures that all staff members are aware of translation services and over-the-phone interpretation services during Staff meetings, emails, and information guides located in the Staff Lounge. Available resources to meet compliance include Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) B-SMARt will fulfill parental notification requirements for translation and interpretation services by ensuring that information that is transmitted is in the language that is readily understandable. In the Main Office, there will be the Welcome Poster displayed with Parents' Bill of Rights, Parents' Guide to Language Access, and Language ID Guide readily accessible. The first point of contact will also have the Language ID Guide. If necessary, the DOE's Translation and Interpretation number will be used to further inquire the needs of the families. In the B-SMARt family handbook, there a section of the book that states all families will be provided the appropriate services and interpretations that are needed. With the assistance of faculty and staff interpreters and the DOE Translation and Interpretation services, families will have available the language assistance services. We are also in partnership with Legal Services and Make the Road New York, where staff and resources are available if needed Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? B-SMARt will be providing surveys and outreach materials to be distributed to families to evaluate the processes that we use to inform families of upcoming events and services. Parent outreach is also provided to get one-on-one feedback. In each grade, we have a parent leader that provides assistance if need be. Certain grade levels also have dual language parent volunteers that can share with parents that need language translation. Our focus group is the Parent Association Executive Board. 2 
