 23K178 School Name: P.S. 178 SAINT CLAIR MCKELWAY Principal: LOREN COOPER   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information St. Clair McKelway School 23K178 School Number (DBN): 332300010178 3-K to 8th 2163 Dean Street, Brooklyn, NY. 11233 (718) 495-7768 Phone Number: (718) 495-2304 Fax: Dr. Joseph Henry Jhenry1@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Dr. Joseph Henry Ms. Paula Sagon Ms. Martinie Lopez Yvette Collins Allman Ms. Martinie Lopez Ms. Nicole Jean-Walker N/A Ms. Hardaman District Information Geographical District: 23 Superintendent’s Office Address: Dr. Miatheresa Pate Superintendent: 1784 Park Place,Brooklyn, NY 11233 MPate@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718)346-0816 Phone Number: (718) 385-3768 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Brooklyn North Bernadette Fitzgerald FSC: Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, NY. 11201 bfitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-3954 Phone Number: 718-935-4814 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Dr. Joseph Henry Paula Sagon Martinie Lopez Brenda Epps Martinie Lopez N/A N/A Nicole Jean-Walters Yvette Collins-Allman *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Parent Advisory Co-Chairperson Chairperson/ 3K  Signature (Blue Ink) Name Ophelia Nelson Charlene Cave Tracey Johnson Nicole Gathers Melissa Alexander Sara Keith Nijima Green Nakia Washington *Brenda Clarke *Charee Garnes Position and Constituent Group Represented Member/ Grades Pre-K-2 Member/ Grades 6-8 Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Task Force Member/Task Force Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? School Mission Statement: Section 4: CEP Overview Through a performance and standard driven curriculum, rich in a collective historical consciousness, Math and Science, P.S. /I.S. 178K will provide a community oriented educational environment, dedicated to achieving high standards of academic excellence, which will lead to individual freedom for all. Our mission has been encapsulated into the following statement:   “To be the best there is; the best there was; and the best there ever will be”. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Strategic collaborations and special initiatives:  Professional Development Consultants for Literacy, Mathematics and English Language Learner support: have provided professional learning for teachers who need additional assistance and grade level support to ensure teachers are planning and executing Common Core aligned lessons with components such as cognitively engaging tasks with appropriate scaffolds for English Language Learners and student with special needs.  School-wide positive behavior intervention support (PBIS): Positive Behavior Intervention Supports at PS/IS 178 is a means through which we will create a cooperative school climate where academic excellence is fostered through Respect and Safety.  Honor Roll Scholars Program: Following marking periods, scholars in grades 6-8 that have earned 85% average in all subject areas are identified to be on the Honor Roll. Honor Roll Scholars receive medals and certificates and are acknowledge during an assembly.  Service /Learning Events: March Into Uniforms, Move to Improve, City Harvest Food Donation Drive, Recycling of bottles, papers and cans; Brooklyn Healthy School, Community Holiday Dinner. Our school participates in the MBK program to support our middle school boys academically and socio-emotionally. In June of 2016, our Early Childhood Annex was relocated to the main building. Our main floor was dedicated for our Early Childhood students. In Summer 2017, PS/IS 178 was selected to pilot Mayor DiBlasio's 3K program. Parents had additional support to help them introduce our 3 year old students to the school, for example: an open classroom policy to reduce parent and student anxiety, parent-child based culminating activities based around their curriculum. We also had holiday celebrations which included parental participation. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We implemented the "My Brother's Keeper" program for middle school boys. Six male staff members and the Assistant Principal coordinated the program. The program addresses the social-emotional and academic needs of middle school boys of color through mentorship within the District ,state and immediate community. Small group and individual sessions were arranged, as well as field trips to high schools, colleges and sporting events to foster male role-model relationships. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Strengths: PS/IS 178 has embedded professional development into its blueprint to move teacher practice and student performance. Accomplishments: 0  PS/IS 178 partners with two community based organizations: Sports and Arts in Schools, and What About the Children. Both organizations help to empower our students by getting them ready for college and career. We also have a “Bully Team” which uses peer intervention to address issues of bullying among students; and a Green Team which educates students about recycling and keeping the school and community clean. During the 2015-16 school year, PS/IS 178 was reviewed by our Centrally-led Quality Review Team. We showed strong improvement in several areas, with movement to “Proficient” ratings in key areas. We showed improvement in the following categories during our review; Rigorous instruction, collaboration between teachers, effective school leadership,and strong family and community ties as well as trust. No review was required this year. During the 2016-17 school year, we experienced significant growth in Parent engagement of over 20% by offering a broad range of parent workshops with a recognition program for those parent who attended regularly. During the 2017-18 school year, due in part to our Early Childhood programs, our parental engagement rose dramatically. We had thirty parents complete the "Village Volunteer" program, which allows parents to work actively with both students and teachers. This is the highest enrollment in District 23. PS/IS 178 piloted the city's 3K program. While other schools in the district had one class of 3 year olds, 178 had three classes. The program was deemed highly successful by both the city and district. Challenges: Our school wide focus this year is fostering a more supportive environment.Increasing numbers of families in temporary housing with patterns of chronic absences at previous schools. Some of our students travel from other boroughs as far away as the Bronx and Queens on a daily basis. They are often late and the children are exhausted because they must get up very early to ride buses and trains. We have continued to expand our systems and structures to monitor and increase the attendance rate of our students. At PBIS assemblies, we acknowledge students with 100% attendance monthly. We also highlight students that continue to show improvement in attendance. Attendance Improvement Mentors (AIM) for our elementary students provided chronically absent students with individualized monitoring and support. To address the needs of our middle school students, the "Single Shepherd" program provided support and incentives to boost attendance. Key areas of focus for this school year are enhancing teacher practice in the area of leveled questioning and student self-assessment to ensure understanding. Also, better use of the teacher-team meetings as a forum to share best practices and monitor implementation successes of teachers' strategic use of scaffolds and questioning so all students show mastery of the learning objective. We continue to face challenges in building parental understanding of their children's academic needs. We are addressing this by continuing to set aside time for parents to meet with teachers without an appointment. The Parent Coordinator will proactively follow up with parents to resolve issues of concern. Monthly student progress reports will be used to keep families informed of their child's growth. We continue to face challenges with enrollment at the school. Numbers fluctuate throughout the year as families move in and out of shelters and new charter schools open in the area. In 2018-19 we will continue to address the 1  issue through use of the previously developed enrollment plan to recruit and retai our student population. As a result of this plan and the addition of the 3K program, we have seen an increase in enrollment of more than 12%. 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 23K178 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 377 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 44 44 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 25 25 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 88.0% % Attendance Rate 85.9% % Reduced Lunch 5.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.6% 18.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 11.09 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 32.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 61% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 2 2 85.7% 1.1% 18.8% 75.3% 1.9% 1.6% 2 29% 1.4 26.1% 40% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  PS/IS 178 has ensured that the "Big Three" ( We are a community of Readers, Writers and Mathematicians) is fully implemented in our school, It is evident in our classrooms,hallways and stairways.Teachers are using Common Core aligned curriculum such as : ReadyGen, Go Math, CMP3, Code X and Explorations. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, 65% of teachers will enhance their pedagogical practices by developing curricula that engages all learners and meets the needs of all students including SWd's and Ells. . We will continue to develop the "student lead-discussion model", to foster critical thinking and student accountability in the classroom. This will be measured by an increase in teacher observation ratings for Danielson component 3c (Engagement). The approach to instruction will result in a 1-3% decrease in students scoring Level One in ELA. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Guided by the belief that all children can learn with appropriate supports and scaffolding, teachers and teacher teams will fine tune the school’s curricula to address the various subgroups of the school community. To establish consistent practices when checking for student understanding,the expectations for this year will be that teacher teams will be used as a forum to share best practices and monitor implementation successes. General Education students, and all identified October 2018-May26 Grade specific 2019 Teacher Team leaders subgroups ie. at-risk, Tuesday (3k and PreK, K-2, 3-5,6-8) SWDELL and Administration The curricula will be informed by Common Core Instructional shifts and the Danielson Framework for Teaching. As a result, all students will be able to produce meaningful work products. Model teachers will conduct intervisitation /demo lessons which highlight best practices. A protocol is in place to ensure that teachers implement what they have learned during these classroom visits. Administrators will conduct formal and informal observations to monitor teacher learning. Use of small group instruction, questioning and discussion techniques (student lead-discussion model) to promote student interaction and critical thinking. Promote use of rubrics for student self assessment General ed. classes, and all identified subgroups,ie. at-risk and SWDELL September 2018-May 2019 Outside Consultants, lead teachers and administration Teacher teams will meet weekly to create a list of schoolwide examples of a progression of leveled questions and prompts to General Ed students,and Ongoing- Grade specific 5  challenge students cognitively, advance high level thinking and discourse; and promote metacognition. all identified subgroups ie. They will engage in ongoing revision of curriculum maps and to address assessment outcomes. A protocol is in place to hold teachers and administrators accountable for revisions to the curriculum. SWDELL and students at-risk Weekly meetings September through June ,2019 Teacher team leaders (3K and Pre K, K,-2, 3-5,6-8) and administration A committee of staff members and parents will work with our CBO's MBK and Sports and Arts to identify additional resources and supports our emotionally at-risk students. Parents, and general staff October 2018 -June 2019. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Our parent Coordinator and committee members will be responsible for identifying resources and support for our students. How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Workshops are held by the School Leadership Team and Parent Coordinator to keep parents informed about the curriculum and how they can support rigorous instruction at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Model Teachers,Lead teachers, SLT ,District Early Childhood Coordinator, contractual professional development and parent engagement time. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 50% of teachers' observation reports will reflect an increase in student engagement through leveled questioning as characterized by higher ratings in the key indicators of Danielson component 3C. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) 6  The observation report data will be used to assess the level of student progress and will be compared to prior reports to identify growth in the indicators of Danielson 3C. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Although the school has made strides in developing and expanding the use of technology for our elementary and Middle School students, we need to extend this initiative to our Early Childhood students in grades PreK-2. Students will be able to utilize technology to further their learning and complete challenging projects which will better prepare them for college and careers. This will also encourage families to join their children in learning how to use the devices together and promote better computer literacy for the parents. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, PS/IS 178 will implement Phase 2 (1 out of 3) of an Early Childhood Technology Initiative.. The curriculum, with resources, will allow 75% of students in grades Pre K-2 to be introduced/exposed to basic computing skills using desktop/laptop/tablet devices at least once per week. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Phase 1 a)Securing a laptop/tablet cart with enough devices for 25 students. b) Acquiring an additional dedicated printer for Early Childhood classes for student materials and projects. c)Acquiring protective casing for devices (tablets) used by students. Grades 1 and-2. September 2018-June 2019 Technology personnel and administration,teachers Phase 2 a)Continue Phase 1 implementation. Grades 3k,Pre K,K,1,2 School Year 2018-19 Technology personnel and administration 9 b)Securing a second cart with device capacity for 25 students. (1 cart for3k, Pre K-K) 2nd floor. (1 cart Gr 1 and 2. 3rd fl) c) Continue to research teaching resources and strategies for full implementation. Phase 3 Grades Year 3 a)Continue Phases 1 and 2 3K, Pre K-2 2019-2020 Technology personnel ,teachers and administration b) Arrange scheduling to include all Pre K-2 classes . c)Make adjustments based on teacher feedback and student outcomes from phases 1 and 2 . d) Consult with Technology teacher for the elementary grades concerning skills needed to transition to Grade 3-8 program. Parents will be informed of aspects of all three phases of the program through letters, PTA meetings, workshops, etc. Posters and other signage will be on display around the school Parents in the school community September -June 2017-2020. Parent coordinator,PTA officers,administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be informed about the purpose of the program. In addition, parents will have an opportunity to participate in parent-child technology activities scheduled as part of our parent engagement program. The parent Coordinator along with key staff and technology personnel will schedule these programs at times convenient for our Early Childhood families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher per session/professional development planning and grants will be the source of support and funding. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all grade 1 and 2 classes will be programmed for technology instruction using laptop or tablet devices at least once per week. With the addition of the 3k program students will be exposed to use of technology. 0  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. General programming schedule, possession of devices with secure storage cart. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  One of our strengths is a school wide schedule that allows teachers to engage in professional collaborations in the form of weekly inquiry teams and Universal Literacy coach-led inter-visitations/coaching sessions at all grade levels.  Ensuring that all lessons included multiple entry points and multiple learning modalities was an area of focus in the 2016-2017 school year. Consultants and lead teachers modeled strategies that fostered improvement of outcomes for all learners.  Workshops were conducted by lead teachers and dissemination of information from outside professional  learning was given and demonstrated to teachers during professional learning blocks. Implementation of the TC writing and Fundations programs in grades K-2 is showing promise in improving student writing outcomes. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. During the 2018-2019 School Year, teachers will continue to implement a developmental writing program for students in grades 3-8. Grade specific teacher teams will share feedback on student work generated. By the end of the Spring 2019 Semester students will show growth reflected in individual writing portfolios/assessments which will yield a 2% decrease in the number of students scoring Level One in grades 3-8 on the NYS ELA exam. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Administrators will continue to communicate high expectations to students and staff via regular monitoring and feedback from observations,snapshots, professional development sessions, curriculum mapping, etc. The school will continue to implement the district-wide vision that "We are a community of writers". The school environment will reflect this via use of student created writing pieces, posters addressing/encouraging good writing habits,etc. Administrators will continue to facilitate opportunities for peer support using warm and cool feedback during brief visitations. Lead ELA teachers have been identified, and a full intervisitation schedule has been developed to maximize the use of highly effective practices. A protocol is in place to capture teacher learning during these visits and administrators have identified "look-fors" during formal and informal observations. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Instructional staff students September 2018 Administration June 2019 School community Instructional staff November 2018 to May 2019 Tuesday Administration Administrators will continue to encourage professional development and growth through use of program consultants and other outside supports. Instructional staff and consultants October, 2018- June 2019 Administration Administrators in consultation with teachers selected the "Writing Revolution" strategies for grades 3-8 Teachers will regularly convey progress and challenges concerning program implementation via the Instructional Support Team and during Professional Development sessions. Specialists and consultants will continue to be invited to work with staff to promote better understanding of how to address the needs of student subgroups in the school. For example. Student support will be provide by classroom teachers/paraprofessionals and AIS personnel during Professional development period Mondays October 2018-May 2019 Administration,ELL and AIS provider Instructional staff including ELL teacher consultation and parents 3  and our ELL provider will suggest the linguistic support within the content areas to further assist this subgroup. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be informed about Writing program enhancements via letters from the school and during initial PA meetings. Additional workshops will be planned for parents as ELA Testing dates are announced, and/or as needed. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher per diem /intervisitations, Implementing the Framework for Teaching on enhancing Professional Practice, teacher per session/professional development, consultant funding are where support will be generated from. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 there will be at least a 2% increase in students who will be on track to score at Level Two or higher in ELA grades 3-8 as measured by the Performance Series Exam. The results will be compared to their baseline scores in September 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Data from results on the Performance Series Exam grades 3-8 should indicate that more students who are tracked for Level Two will actually achieve a level 2 score. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  One of the school's strengths is the articulation of a clear vision. Our students strive "to be the best there is; the best there was; and the best there ever will be." This is in alignment with the district wide initiative "Moving Forward Together".  The school has identified key staff members who consistently meet as an instructional cabinet and are charged with being instructional leaders throughout the school.  Within the self-contained classroom setting, ensure that students receive a variety of feedback from both teachers and peers in order to advance learning.  Continue to norm observation feedback from supervisors, supportive feedback from coaches and colleagues to ensure adjustments to instructional practices across classrooms to maintain coherence and honor how the school believes students learn best. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. From October to May of the 2018-19 School Year, teacher observation reports will more accurately capture strengths, challenges, and specific next steps for the teacher to take as measured by the Principal Performance Observation Reports issued during Superintendent visits. Data from previous reports will be compared to measure growth. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Through the ongoing work of teacher teams and the Instructional Support Team, instructional " non-negotiables" including: lesson plan alignment to CCLS,to meet the needs of diverse learners, a progression of leveled questions and a reflection of multiple learning styles to increase student engagement will be established. All classroom instructors September 2018 to June, 2019 Strategy will be Coordinated by lead-teachers, consultants and administration Teachers will use teacher team meetings as a forum to share best practices and monitor implementation successes. All Classroom instructors All parents September 2018 to June 2019 Strategy Coordinated by lead-teachers and consultants Parent Coordinator, SLT, SETTS provider September 2018 June 2019 monthly topics. All parents September Parent Coordinator,Principal, 2018 to June, 2019 Teachers will strategically use scaffolds and questioning so all students show mastery of the learning objectives and corresponding standards. A series of Parent Workshops has been established to inform families on how they can support their children at home to meet the increased demands of the CCLS. These workshops will be held at various times both during and after school to accommodate parent schedules. Special workshops will be held for parents of students with disabilities, so they can have a better understanding of how to help. Monthly "Coffee with the Principal" sessions will be held to invite parents into the school and share ideas and concerns. Themes will include: early childhood development for 3-5 year olds, supporting reading development, fun math games, communicating with your teens/tweens, and summer enrichment opportunities. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 6  Monthly "Coffee with the Principal" sessions will be held to invite parents into the school and share ideas and concerns. Themes to be continue will include: early childhood development for 3-5 year olds, communicating with your teens/tweens, supportive reading development,fun math games, and summer enrichment opportunities. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Title I Parent Involvement/Engagement and contractual teacher meeting time will be used to plan, and to inform parents. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019 PPO results will indicate that teacher feedback on observation reports provides effective and actionable next steps for the improvement of practice. This information will be reported in a user-friendly format . Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher/teacher team comments /surveys will be assessed to see if they are receiving the feedback they need. Teacher lesson plans and learning outcomes based on class assessment data will reflect improvements that result from clearer,more actionable information. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  According to the NYC Quality Guide of 2016-17, we exceeded our goal of 5% increase in parental engagement. Parent responses were 99% positive with 100% of parents surveyed.  Despite making gains in parental participation, we find that the majority of parental engagement was from the lower grades (3K-3). Grades 4-8 remain underrepresented. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, the level of parental engagement at PS/ IS 178 will continue to show a 5% increase over the same time period (September -June) in 2018. The data will be derived from sign-in sheets of parent workshops,meetings, and events on file at the school. This data will be disaggregated by grade. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Workshops as well as social events will be given by various school and community agencies such as DOE vendors (SASF), CBO's and other groups ie. MBK, addressing areas of parent interest. These interests may include both academic based need and /or social issues. Parents of the school community including September 2018-June 2019 Workshops are given to help immigrant families obtain information and help them to adjust to the environment . Translation services are available as needed. Announcements are made to remind and inform parents of upcoming events and encourage participation. Brief questionnaires are distributed to participants at the conclusion of each session. These questionnaires are distributed to assess the effectiveness of the session and determine future topics of interest. Session content is modified to reflect parent feedback. The first Tuesday of the month is dedicated to parent workshops, which are facilitated by teachers and our Parent Coordinator. We will be distributing books in collaboration with the District Office and UFT at some of our family events such our Annual Community Holiday Dinner, Movie Nights and Fun Day. Parents will receive take-home activities they can do with their children. Our local Public Library branches will also offer Book Mobile visits and information on how to obtain other reading/media materials to families. The entire school community including staff, students, and parent leaders is charged with informing parents about, and generating interest in upcoming school events. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Activity Coordination by Parent Coordinator,Guidance,SLT, PA, Single Shepherd counselors Activity Coordination by our ELL provider assisted by our Parent Coordinator October, 2018- June 2019 STH families ELL families STH- ELL families Parents of the school community, October 2018- June Strategy 2019 Parent Coordinator or program coordinator Parents teachers and students September 2018-June 2019 Parent Leaders,Parent Coordinator,teachers and SLT If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 9  We will continue our partnerships with Brooklyn Public Library,UFT, and our District Office to provide services during the 2018-19 school year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Title I Parent Involvement/Engagement,contractual parent engagement time and Parent Coordinator,and SLT involvement. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of January 2019, there will be a increase of participants at parent events of 3% as measured by event sign-in sheets. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. All sign-in sheets used to document attendance will be collected and analyzed to identify growth in parent participants. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) The Literacy Block includes an AIS period (50 minutes) scheduled Monday -Friday when a specialist or teacher pushes-in and provides additional guided instruction to small groups. In addition, specialists have scheduled intervention periods to provide literacy instruction with the program "Leveled Literacy Intervention" to small groups in Kindergarten -Grade 8. Intervention services are provided during one-to-one conferences and small group instruction. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) ELA academic intervention services are provided one -to one and during small group instruction such as guided reading and writing groups. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) ELA academic Intervention Services are provided through small group instruction within guided reading programs such as "Literacy by Design" (Grades K-8) and" Leveled Literacy Intervention" Grades (K-8) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) To ensure that students who are not performing at the prescribed proficiency levels, student assessments such as: running records, miscue analysis, on-demand writing and results of periodic assessments are reviewed and analyzed in a timely and effective mannerto determine ELA /AIS intervention services. Mathematics Science Criteria for identifying students to receive academic intervention services in mathematics is determined by reviewing end of modules assessment results, exit slips,etc. Criteria for identifying students to receive academic intervention services in Science Student receive intervention during guided Math instruction delivered by classroom teachers. Students are also scheduled for a period of Math Enrichment every week with the Math specialist. Science academic intervention services are provided to students during Mathematics Intervention services are provided one-to-one and in small groups when teachers provide differentiated instruction during mathematics instructional block. 1 Science intervention services are provided one-to-one and in small groups when Intervention services are provided during conferences and small group  Social Studies (Grades 4, 6-8)is determined by reviewing end of unit assessment results exit slips, etc. Criteria for identifying students to receive academic intervention services in Social Studies (Humanities) is determined by reviewing end of unit assessment results, exit slips, project comments, etc. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining at-risk services are teacher/administration referrals, crisis or emergency support, additional socialization or transition support identified, mediation and conflict resolution support identified. small group instruction guided by classroom teacher using materials and resources provided by FOSS and Delta Instructional resources. Social Studies (Humanities) academic intervention services are provided to students during small group instruction guided by classroom teachers using instructional materials and resources (eg. multi-media, websites, text, etc.) that support concept and /or themes. One-to one and small group guidance and counseling sessions. ERSA Counseling is available on an as-needed basis. teachers provide differentiated instruction during instruction both during the day and after school. Science in grades 1-5. (Grades 6-8) 10:1 Teacher -student ratio. Social Studies (Humanities) academic Intervention services are provided to students during small group instruction guided by classroom teachers using instructional materials and resources (e.g., multi-media, websites,text, etc.z) that support concept, and/or themes. 10:1 Teacher -student ratio in Grades 6-8. One to one and small group guidance and counseling sessions. Intervention services are provided during conferences and small group instruction. Group guidance and counseling sessions are scheduled once a week or as needed. ERSA counseling available on an as-needed basis. 2  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) As of May 2018, PS/IS 178 has 25 children in Temporary Housing . 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Our STH families are supported by liaisons from their housing sites, who are in regular contact with our Family Worker and Parent Coordinator. Also ,our Parent Coordinator and Single Shepherd providers arrange for families to access services to help them in their search for permanent housing. They also hold workshops using representatives from City service agencies, eg Health, Youth Services, Job training ,etc. to give parents more resources. To further supplement these services; uniforms/clothing , equipment (cribs,strollers) and school supply drives are held in collaboration with SLT to assist STH families in extreme need. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 3  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 4  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. To recruit highly qualified staff, we consult our Borough Field Support Center, HR Director, Superintendent's Team, consultants and staff for referrals of teachers that hold the appropriate license for the vacancy. For teachers that are not highly qualified, we offer support (e.g. opportunities to enroll in coursework, funding sources, etc.) for him/her to fulfill the requirements of the license area. In order to retain our highly qualified teachers, we offer ongoing professional development sessions, family workshops, etc. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). All teachers, administration, paraprofessionals and staff are afforded the opportunity to attend professional development in their specialized areas ,as well as areas where they need improvement. Professional Development is provided for all teachers in the areas of Literacy and Mathematics by District 23 Office and DOE approved vendors. In addition to the professional development provided, our teachers are supported by their grade leaders and have the opportunity to collaborate with grade colleagues daily during their common preparation period. New teachers are supported by an in-house mentor. They meet a minimum of two periods a week during and after school. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 5  N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). As of September 2016, our Early childhood Unit is in our Main Building on a dedicated floor. This will facilitate parents becoming acquainted with the Elementary environment in the school. Our Early childhood staff will continue to offer workshops and meetings to make our 3K- K families comfortable as they fully shift into the Elementary setting. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Administrator and teachers discuss and review the menu of periodic assessments and assessments aligned to the curriculum and select ones that will be administered to the students at each respective grade level. Grade level meetings and professional development sessions are conducted prior to the administration of the assessments to review scoring, administration and interpretation of assessment results. Our Measures of Student Learning (MOSL) Committee meets periodically to make decisions regarding assessments. As a result, there is adequate teacher and administrative input as to what MOSL's will be used to assess our children. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Sections 5A-5E, Part 3 of Action Plan Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 252,778 X 6  Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Local 60,452 0 0 2,065,464 X X Sections 5A-5E,Part 3 of Action Plan Sections 5A-5E, Part 3 of Action Plan 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another 7  purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 8  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS/IS 178, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. 9 Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students  PS/ IS 178K supports parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 0  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS/IS 178 K, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 1  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 2  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); 3  ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; 4  ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 5  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 23 School Name St. Claire Mckelway School Borough Brooklyn School Number 178 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Dr. Joseph Henry Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Adekunle Ibrahim Teacher/Subject Area type here Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent type here Assistant Principal Lorenzo Soleyn Coach type here School Counselor type here Parent type here Parent Coordinator Priscilla Davis Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification 0 Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 330 6 Total number of ELLs 25 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 7.58%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Paste response to questions here: Paste response to questions 1-6 here Assessment tools -In order to assess the early literacy of our ELLs, we use: -Fountas and Pinnell, for K through grade 5 New York City Perfomance Task, NYC Periodic Assessment (Common Core aligned) - We use TCRWP Running Records for grades 6 through 8 - We also use Reading A-Z as a supplemental tool of assesmment for its various reading genres and cultural connections. The assessments help teachers to place students on suitable independent reading level and for choosing the right guided reading books for them. Data patterns across proficiency levels 7  -98% of students at the entering level struggle with phonemic awareness, listening and reading comprehension. -50% of students at emerging level struggle with listening and reading comprehension. -65% of students at the transitional level stuggle with listening and reading comprehension. -20% of students at the expanding level struggle with listening and comprehension. -Only 10% of students at the combined proficiency levels approach the NYS standards in response to literature. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Paste response to question here: Each month the teacher submits Monthly Data Summary sheets to the Principal. These data sheets show the scores of in class assessments, projects and writing assignments. Additionally, the school administers school-wide assessments in ELA and Mathematics every other month. The results of these assessments include diagnostic results where the teacher and administrative team can track student progress in specific skills and strategies. Additionally this school year a Baseline Assessment with diagnostic results was administered. This data is being used to monitor ELL students' progress in specific skill areas such as context clues, main idea, cause and effect and inferring. The data shows that mastery of these specific skills is below that of English speaking students. The students' progress are also tracked quarterly through periodic assessments on Performance Series. The data from the assessments is used to determine if students are making adequate progress towards meeting the CCLS benchmarks in ELA and Mathematics. The item analysis reports provides the teacher with data to determine which skills need to be revisited and which skills the students' have achieved mastery in. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Paste response to question here: Within the RTI framework, we use data to: - set high expectations for students. Students are exposed to grade level materials, using differetiation as strategy for them to reach it together -inform us about relevant research-based instructional strategies that match our students' needs -use ongoing and authentic assessments that match our students'needs collaborate with other teachers -regroup students peers that can benefit them, in order that all studedents have access to content of make decisions about the core curriculum (e'g., by providing the rationale for learning a specific standard by a student -improve the learning environment and the behavior climate of students. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. -Entering level students require phonics instruction woven into their curriculum -Entering and emerging students require phonemic awareness and sight words instruction and practice. -Entering, emerging, transitional, and expanding level students need practice in accountatable talk for oral expression and organized thoughts in order to respond to literature. -All students, across the modalties, need vocabulary instruction and a systematic approach to the structure of the English words(affixes). 8  All students, across the modalties, need instruction and practice in writing(from letter writng, words, sencetences for the lower grade entering levels to quickwrites of paragraphs and essays in the upper grades. Paste response to question here: 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Paste response to questions here: The school uses the push-in/pull-out model of instruction for ELLs. During ELA and/or Math block push-in instruction is provided to ELLs in their classroom. The teacher works with the ELL students as well as other English speaking students assigned to that particular reading group or math group. Very often the students are grouped by reading levels. Sometimes the students are grouped by skill so that they can work on that particular deficiency. During the pull-out sessions the students are grouped heterogenously and the ELL teacher provides the students with instruction targeted to their specific proficiency level. He uses the Santillana Spotlights program, and the the Reading A-Z as a supplement. The students work on the same Skill-of-the-Week as that the school is working on as well as the same Monthly Writing Genre that is assigned for that particular month. Additionally, the ELL Teacher uses the school's Book of the Month to provide students with instruction parallel to the classroom teacher. The students' work is kept in portfolios. The ESL teacher also attends the monthly grade conferences where the teachers work collaboratively to create monthly curriculum maps. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: N/A c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Paste response to questions here: All students receive 105-minutes per day of ELA instruction. When a students receives ESL instruction during the Literacy Block, the ESL Teacher uses the skill and strategy focus of the week to instruct the students. The ESL teacher bases her ESL instruction on what the classroom teacher is teaching in ELA. Entering and emerging ELLs receive eight periods per week of ESL instruction. Transitioning and expanding ELLs receive four periods per week of ELL instruction. The commanding students are serviced two times per week. To the extent possible, the ESL Teacher pushes in to the classroom and co-teaches with the classroom teacher to scaffold learning for the ELL students. 9  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Paste response here: The ESL program model delivers content in English with native language support (textbook in native language, Spanish). The ELL Teacher provides the students with native language support materials such as native language dictionaries, thesaurus, glossaries and textbooks when available. Currently we have resources in Spanish, French, Haitian Creole and Arabic. Since the school uses the workshop model of instruction, students receive individualized instruction and support from the ELL Teacher. Classroom teachers are aware of ELL students in their class and the needs of the ELLs are discussed at Teacher Team meetings. At the Teacher Team meetings the teachers create the Common Core Units of Studies and the work collaboratively with the ELL teacher to provide academic support so that the ELL students can complete the project. Very often, this involves providing ELLs with translated versions of the text being studied, use of visual aids and providing ELLs with hands on tools to complete the experiments. All teachers are scheduled to attend Professional Development related to ELLs and they will fulfill the mandated 10 hours of professional development. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Paste response to question here: When possible, the initial evaulation is based on an informal interview in the students' native language. The ESL teacher uses a grade level baseline assessment to determine the needs of the student in mathematics and English. This school year we are using the Continental Press New York ELLs program to ensure that students receive appropriate instruction in the essential domanis which are speaking, listening, reading and writing. The program provides instruction in listening for academic content, comprehension of dialogue and information, and response to graphic information. eBooks are also used in the classroom with ELLs. During independent instruction, the classroom teacher may assign ELL students to work on the Finish Line Interactive eBook so that they receive instruction targeted specifically for them. ELL students are assessed quarterly to measure their progress in English language acquisition. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Paste response to questions here: At the commencement of the school year, teachers receive instruction on using data to differentiate instruction. The ELL teacher works with the Assistant Principal to classify students and they ensure that students are placed in classrooms with the appropriate instructional supports required. All classroom teachers receive standardized assessment data on ELLs, previous years interim assessment data and the June reading benchmark results. As a school that uses the workshop model, students receive differentiated small group instruction in all subject areas. The ELL Teacher and classroom teachers are trained to meet the needs of SIFE students. When a SIFE student is admitted to the school they are given a native language proficiency exam, where the student is asked to read, write, speak and listen. The data from this informal assessment is used to determine the academic needs of the student. When the student enters the classroom they are assigned a "buddy" . This is a classmate who will show the SIFE student the classroom routines and buddy with him/her as the class travels through the school building throughout the day. The classroom teachers are trained to work with SIFE students. During the instructional day the teacher will elicit prior knowledge on given topics and check for comprehension as topics are introduced, use graphic organizers to display information, employ drama, role play and pictures to enhance communication as well as books on CD to help with language acquisition. The school library as well as class library contains books in the students' native language. Students in the US for less than three years are assessed in their English and Native language proficiency. Newer students work in pairs with students who are more advanced. Based on the data available to the ELL Teacher and classroom teacher, the students my begin receiving instruction in phonemic awareness, vocabulary and comprehension. The are assigned Ticket 0  to Read for 20-minutes per day so that they can develop their vocabulary skills. During the Teacher Team meetings the ESL teacher will work with the classroom teacher to create perscriptive skill based activities that meet the needs of the new comers. The students are also invited to particpate in the Title III Extended Day Program which meets once a week for two hours. ELL students who have received four to six years of service will receive scaffolded instruction. The teachers use UDL principles to created differentiated instructional activities that address the specific needs of these learners. The students also participate the Afterschool Academy which provides students with supplemental instruction in ELA and Math on Mondays and Thursdays for two hours per day. Very often these students fall within the lowest third in ELA performance. As a result, they will be invited to attend the Developmental Reading Aftrerschool Program which operates from September - December each year. Longterm ELLs, are provided with supplemental pull-out instruction in literacy and math. Additionally, the teacher will use progress monitoring and item analysis reports to determine the specific areas of deficiency. The ELL Teacher and Classroom teacher will work collaboratively to design instructional activities that are suited for the specific needs of the student. After ELL students have tested out of the ELL program the classroom teacher and ELL teacher uses interim data to closely monitor the students' progress. Students who score on Levels 1 & 2 receive intervention from the AIS teacher. Additionally, the students will be mandated to attend the Afterschool Academy. Parents will receive monthly progress reports that relfect the students achievement and provides parents with strategies that they may use at home to support their child's academic acheivement. The classroom teacher will use UDL principles to differentiate instruction in the classroom. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The ELL Teacher along with all classroom teachers are trained to meet the needs of ELL students with IEPs. Professional development is provided in differentiating instruction, modifying instructional practices to meet the CCLS, inter-classroom visitations, teacher team meetings and study groups. The UFT Teacher Center Staff Developer provides coaching to all teachers in supporting the unique needs of ELLs with IEPs. Students are also given support outside of the classroom through the Title III Extended Day Program and the Afterschool Academy. These programs place emphasis on improving students' comprehension and analytical skills. The Inquiry Team also works collaboratively, using data, to create instructional strategies that promote achievement of ELL students with disabilities. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Paste response to question here: Teacher Team Meetings on Tuesdays are used to provide classroom teachers and subject area teachers the opportunity to collaborate and create unit plans that addresses the learning needs of all students. Through common planning, all teachers able to focous on the same theme each month. As a result, ELL-SWD students have consistency with content when they are being served by one of the providers. The push-in/pull-out model is used to provide ELL-SWD services to support their instructional needs. Through flexible scheduling, the providers are able to provide some support to the student within the classroom which leads to greater consistency in learning for the student. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Paste response to question here: Data from the NYS Assessments, periodic assessments, NYSESLAT, unit assessments, teacher created assessments, conference notes and benchmark results are used to target ELL students in need of intervention. The classroom teachers use UDL strategies within classroom as an initial form of intervention. For literacy we use small group instruction, center based activities, Ticket to Read and Access Code to provide intervention within the classroom. In mathematics; manipulatives, small group instruction, Go-Math, ST-Math, Voyager Math and pull-out intervention from the staff developer is provided. Progress monitoring is used to track students and to determine if additional support may be needed in one of the content areas. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? 1  Paste response to question here: This school year we are using eBooks in the classroom to provide the students with support in vocabulary development and reading comprehension. The program allows students to work at their own pace and the stories are leveled according to benchmark results. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Paste response to question here: None 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Paste response to question here: ELLs are offered opportunities to attend all school programs including the afterschool program: Sports and Arts, which is everyday from 2:30 P.M. - 5:30 P.M. Additionally, the school has a site license for all online programs Ticket to Read, Voyager Math, ST-Math, eBooks and Access Code. All students have their own unique passwords for these programs. Ticket to Read, Voyager Math and My Own eBooks are also accessible to students at home after school and on the weekends. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Paste response to question here: All ELLs have access to online resources. This includes eBooks for ELLs, Ticket to Read, Access Code, Voyager Math and My Own eBooks are available to ELLs. The stories on Ticket to Read and My Own are predominantly non-fiction based. They consist of informational articles that are based on science and/or social studies. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Paste response to question here: Each classroom contains native language support materials such as native language independent reading books on the students' instructional level. Classroom teachers also have translated glossaries, theasaurus and dictionaries. The science, math and social studies textbooks are available in Spanish. There are storybooks in Arabic in the ELL classroom. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Paste response to question here: Support services and resouces correspond to ELLs ages and grade levels. Classroom libraries are age and grade appropriate, as well as leveled for independent reading. The common core Performance Tasks are based on high interest topics that the students can relate to. The classroom teachers organize the class library by level as well as genre so that students can appropriately select independent reading books. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Paste response to question here: All ELLs have access to online resources. This includes eBooks for ELLs, Ticket to Read, Access Code, Voyager Math and My Own eBooks are available to ELLs. The stories on Ticket to Read and My Own are predominantly non-fiction based. They consist of informational articles that are based on science and/or social studies. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Paste response to question here: When students enroll, they are assigned a buddy who is a fellow classmate. The ELL Teacher takes the student on a tour of the school to familiarize the new students with the building facilities. The student is introduced to the class and the other students 2  introduce themselves to the new student. The classroom teacher ensures the student is introduced to all teachers who service the class. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Paste response to question here: N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Paste response to question here: The PS/IS 178 Development Plan includes the following goal: To use common planning time and Teacher Team meetings to support faculty members with analyzing student data to develop differentiated learning opportunities that addresses the instructional needs of all students, including ELLs and SWD. The following activities are planned: As a Professional Learning Community, engage in study groups using the book Understanding Learning Styles; Making a Difference for Diverse Learners by Kelli Allen, Jeanna Scheve and Vicki Nieter to analyze research based strategies that may be used to construct instructional lessons that provide multiple entry points and addresses the learning needs of ELLs and SWDs Conduct monthly inter-visitations cycles, where each teacher will have the opportunity to participate in a learning visit three times for the school year Use Model Lessons conducted by the UFT Teacher Center Staff Developer to train faculty members on how to execute lessons where differentiated strategies are used to provide multiple entry points for ELLs and SWDs Collaborate with partner schools to conduct intra-visitations to classrooms that serve ELLs and SWDs Participate in learning opportunities conducted by Brooklyn South that place emphasis on lesson planning, unit planning, creating enrichment activities and structuring lessons to provide multiple entry points for ELLs and SWDs Professional Development is offered to all faculty members to strengthen their instructional practices in teaching ELL students. Our gaol is to use the Common Core Learning Standards as the foundation to develop instructional straetgies that will enable ELL students to perform on grade level within the first two years in the program. All faculty members, including the ELL teacher, will participate in the following professional development opportunities: Using Manipulatives to Make Abstract Concepts Concrete (1 Hour) Strategies for Intellectual Engagement (1 Hour) Using Data to Plan Instructional Activities (1 Hour) Close Reading Strategies to Support all Learners (1 Hour) Close Reading in the Content Area (1 Hour) Using Accountable Talk to Promote Content Area Vocabulary Development Utilizing Diagnostic Data and Observational Data to Plan Instructional Activities for Subgroups (1 Hour) 3  Inquiry Based Instruction in the Content Areas (1 Hour) Increasing Student Engagement through Preferred Learning Styles (1 Hour) 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Paste response to question here: The Guidance Counselors and ELL Teacher work collaboratively to prepare students for their transition to middle school. This begins with the Senior parent Meeting which is held in October of the student's senior year. At the meeting there are translators available to speak to parents in their native language. The parents receive information about the middle school application process. They are given contact information for the ELL Teacher and Guidance Counselors so that they may meet with them individual to learn about the middle school selection process. Additionally, the ELL Teacher works with the students to find out their special interests and goals, so that she may guide in the selection of a middle school that meets their needs. Paste response to question here: The Parkway School's Annual Professional Development, allots one hour per week on Mondays for professional development as well as 45-minutes on Tuesdays for Teacher Team Meetings. These professional development opportunities are in addition to monthly learning opportunities offered by the Brooklyn South and monthly professional development opportunities offered by the District 23 Field Liaison. All sign-in sheets and agendas are kept on file for seven years. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Paste response to question here: The ELL Teacher uses the Tuesday Parent Engagement Time to communicate with parents of ELLs. Since the parents of the ELL students usually pick them up daily, the ELL Teacher is able to meet with them at the Tuesday Table Top meeting to discuss the ESL program as well as their child's progress. Each month the teacher completes a Monthly Progress Report that includes information about interim assessments, classwork and progress. The Monthly Progress reports are shared with parents. The school has staff available who are able to speak Haitian-Creole, Spanish and some Arabic. Translators are available during the Tuesday Parent Engagement time. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Paste response to question here: There are many parent involvement opportunities available at the school for parents of ELL students. The Parent Coordinator conducts monthly Parent Institutes. Currently we have two institutes that are headed by parents of a current ELL student and a former ELL student. There is a weekly Parent Jewelry Making class, where parents learn how to design and make necklaces and bracelets. The parent who runs the program speaks Spanish and one participant speaks French. We also have another Parent Institute which meets twice a month, Cake Decorating and Catering. The Parent Coordinator along with a parent leader teaches the participants how to make cakes, pasteries and baked goods. They also provide the parents with resources regarding starting a homebased catering business. The participants in these two programs include parents of ELL students and former ELL students. The administrative team also works with the NYC Mayor's Office to provide workshops for parents. Each year, we work with the Mayor's Office to conduct Citizenship and Immigration workshops. The Mayor's office provides translators for all 4  meetings. The Mayor's office also conducted a workshop on obtaining a NYC ID and free places to visit with the ID. The Parent Associationa and PAC also conducts parent involvement activities. There is a Bi-lingual Parent Representative on PAC who ensures that parents receives communication about the events in their native language. Each year PAC organizes at least two a family day trips. This year PAC has planned a NYC sight seeing tour around Manhattan and a trip to Ellis Island which includes a tour. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: As a multi-cultural school, the administrative team works collaboratively with the Parent Coordinator, PAC, PA and the faculty members to create parent involvement activities that address the needs of the parents. The activities are created based on parent surveys, feedback from teachers and and feedback from PA/PAC. 5 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Joseph Frantz Henry, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 6  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Joseph Henry Title Principal Lorenzo Soleyn Assistant Principal Priscilla Davis Parent Coordinator Adekunle Ibrahim ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 7  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 23 School Name: 1 Superintendent: M. DeGovia The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. At P.S. 167 we are committed to the education of our students. As part of our pursuit to do what is best for our students, we have developed partnerships with parents and community members. When parents enroll their children in P.S. 167, they are given the Home Language Survey and interviewed by a trained teacher or administrator. During the interview we obatin the language choice for communication. The data from the Home Language Survey is used to inform faculty members of the family's preferred language for oral and written communication. When written notices are sent home, they are translated into the family's preferred language of communication. We have found that French, Haitian-Creole, Spanish and Arabic are the four languages parents have requested as their prefered language of communication. Additionally, designated faculty members provide orientation and guidance for parents of newly enrolled ELLs by conferring with them in their preferred language about educational choices, school rules and policies, expecations and their rights under the law. Parents are provided with opporunities to visit the school during the Instructional 8  Day, Open Houses, PA Meetings, Parent Workshops and teacher meetings. Translators are available at these events to translate information to parents in their preferred language of communication. In order to keep parents informed they may complete Part III. Parent Information of the Parent/Guardian Home Language Identification Survey. The school has translated versions of the Home langauge Identification Survey (HLIS).The responses to these supplementary questions are used so that the school can communicate with the parent's language of choice. Moreover, parent preference data is indicated on the Emegency Contact Card. The school maintains the primary language preference on ATS and the student emergency card. Letters are sent home indicating parents to contact the school's Parent Coordinator if they may need language assistance. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language After reviewing Parents Preferred Language report on ATS the majority of the parents are requesting communication in English. Approximately 5% of parents are requesting communication in Spanish.Other limited languages include Haitian-Creole and Arabic. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families September: How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. 9  Forms: Emergency Contact Information, How will your child go home?, Picture Permission, Bus Passes/Metrocards School Calendar Meet the Teacher Night After School Program Information November: Grading Policy Parent Teacher Conferences January: Promotion in Doubt Letter March: Parent Teacher Conferences April: New York State Testing Calendar May: Parent Teacher Night June: Graduation information 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Parent Teacher Nights: September 17, May 12 Parent Teacher Conferences: November 17, March 16 provide interpretation service(s)? 0  Informal Parent Meetings are held throughout the year on Tuesdays, 3:05-3:55 and by appointment The Guidance Counselor meets with 8th grade parents during the High School articulation process from September-Ongoing and Letters and Directories are distributed for Middle School Articulation The Guidance Counselor schedules individual appointments upon request Teachers meet with parents of students with disabilities for Annual Reviews and IEP meetings 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) At the main entrance of the school, welcome signs along with notices on the right to request translation and interpretation services are displayed in all of the languages covered under Chancellor' Regulation A-663. The school Safety Agent desk has language cards so parents can identify the language they speak. The Parents' Bill of Rights is displayed on the PA Bulletin Board and made available to parents in their preferred language by the Parent Coordinator, in addition to other resources such as the Parents' Guide to Language Access. Parents are informed of the translation services that are available to them at PA, parent/teacher, Leadership and Title I meetings and through 1  writtten notices. Translated letters are backpacked home before every formal meeting informing parents of the availability of translation and interpretation services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our Parent Coordinator is in regular contact with parents, ensuring that parents are receiving the translation services that they need. Feedback from parents is also gathered through PA meetings, School Leadership Team meetings, and through the annual school environment survey. The primary language of each parent is maintained in ATS and on the student emergency card. This resource is available when parents complete the Home Language Survey and the Emergency Contact card. Parents who request interpretation services regarding critical information about their child's education will be provided in house by school staff and, when necessary, using the Translation and Interpretation Unit using Speakerphone. Parents are encouraged to contact the school's parent coordinator for language assistance. 2 
