 20K180 School Name: THE SEEALL ACADEMY Principal: GARY WILLIAMS   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The SEEALL Academy 332000010180 Pre-K – 8 School Number (DBN): 20K180 5601 16 th Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11204 718-851-8070 718-853-9308 Phone Number: Fax: Angela Panetta apanetta@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 20 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Gary M. Williams Lynette Azar Arlene Graziano Lynette Azar TBD n/a n/a n/a District Information Karina Costantino Superintendent: 415 89 th Street kcostan@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-759-4908 Phone Number: 718-759-4908 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Brooklyn South Mauricière de Govia FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 415 89 th Street mdegovia@aol.com Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-759-4908 Phone Number: 718-759-4908 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Gary Williams Lynette Azar Arlene Graziano Eddie Morales SahabatSelmani Russiko Stephanova Nancy Das FahimaAktherHaque *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) ShaberaSultana BegieZeqa Donald Brenner Dawn Torpey Monique Wallace Michele Simeone Linda Eskenazi Roseanna Giannuzzi Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Teacher Member/School Secretary Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission Statement PS/IS 180 The SEEALL Academy’s mission statement emphasizes the importance of teamwork and collaboration amongst students and all constituents in the school community.   “As we walk through these doors we are all the same. We are all here to learn. We will help each other become the best that we can be. We will take our weaknesses and turn them into strengths. We will take our strengths and share them. As we walk down this path together we will help each other become the best we can be. Together we can do anything.” 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Contextual Information PS/IS 180 The SEEALL Academy serves students in Pre-Kindergarten through Grade 8, located in the heart of Borough Park, Brooklyn. Our school holds high educational standards with academic success for all students. Our staff provides a supportive environment that encourages students to develop into young leaders. SEEALL Academy students thrive as a result of an inclusive educational philosophy that recognizes all students as gifted and talented. Inspired by an article written by Bill Gates, and with its base rooted in the Common Core, the Students Educationally Enriched as Learning Leaders (SEEALL) Academy engages its students as active participants in the learning process. A unique partnership is formed with the teacher, student, and parent. This, in turn, instills and nurtures leadership among its students, preparing them for a successful future. The SEEALL Academy is a dynamic school serving over 1,100 students from culturally diverse backgrounds. This multi-faceted student population includes English Language Learners (ELLs), representing 24% of the overall student body, as well as Students with Disabilities (SWDs), comprising 16% of the student population. The school is located in a community where the majority of children attend private schools for academic and religious instruction, thus many of 180’s children are bussed in from nearby communities. The school building is a well-maintained, updated pre-war building where students’ work and class collaborations are proudly displayed throughout the building. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Challenges Serving a unique population of students, including ELLs and SWDs, means that the school must diversify instruction to better serve the needs of each individual learner. According to the school’s 2015-16 School Quality Snapshot, our greatest challenges is in the area of average proficiency ratings for students in self-contained classes, revealing that these Students with Disabilities (SWDs) are those who performed lowest on the State exams, specifically in English Language Arts (ELA). Most of these students require individually differentiated instruction that incorporates multiple modalities of learning based on their unique needs. To address this challenge, teachers of SWDs complete bi-monthly summary reports, where they identify strengths, challenges, priority areas of focus, and next steps, all based on comprehensive data analysis and the child's individualized education plan. In addition, teachers receive a Prescriptive for each individual student; which identifies strengths, areas of need, individual student data and biographical information, along with his/her learning needs. Teachers then plan accordingly for individual students based on the information presented in these Prescriptives. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 0  School Strengths and Accomplishments Students are provided with several outlets to exhibit and enhance their leadership skills. The newly implemented pre-med and pre-law programs offer students a chance to immerse themselves in authentic activities related to the medical and law fields during their enrichment periods. Pre-med students participate in hands-on experiments and trips to hospitals and other scientific institutions. Pre-law students conduct mock trials and visit real courtrooms. A partnership has been established with the Brooklyn District Attorney’s office. In the 2018-19 school year, The SEEALL Academy is analyzing and revamping current curricula to better meet the needs of our growing English Language Learner (ELL) population, which is at an all-time high of 29% (up from 23% in the previous school year). The school has adopted the Advanced Literacy model to make learning more equitable and accessible for all students, but primarily ELLs. Our goal is that by June 2019, students are provided with a minimum of two units of study in each content area that are reflective of the Advanced Literacy hallmarks. Additionally, the inquiry work of teacher teams for this school year will be centered around Hallmark 4 of advanced literacy, "Study a small set of high utility vocabulary words needed to master language and content." In the 2018-19 school year, The SEEALL Academy seeks to continue partnerships with community-based organizations. A partnership with the Federation of Italian American Organization (FIAO) provides instructional and enrichment afterschool programs. Through the Chess in the Schools program, third and sixth graders will be provided with weekly chess instruction, and a competitive team will be established to compete in tournaments throughout the city and in the chess national tournament in Tennessee. A Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts, and Mathematics (STEAM) afterschool program will be provided to students in grades 2 through 8, as well as STEAM enrichment opportunities for students in all grades throughout the school. In the 2018-19 school year, each fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh and eighth grade student will receive their own chrome books to be used during the instructional day. Junior High School students will be permitted to bring the chrome book home on a daily basis. Teachers have been trained in the use of Google Chrome, and their lesson plans reflect recent developments in such technologies. The Student Leadership Academy and Executive Leadership Academy engage students in studies of public speaking, etiquette, multi-cultural awareness and social skills activities during their enrichment cycles. The student government practices true decision-making during monthly Town Hall meetings for junior high students. Students have the opportunity to partake in a variety of extracurricular programs, including ARISTA, ARCHON, CHAMPS Sports, Visual Arts, Theatre, Band, Chorus, Violin, and the esteemed Symphony Orchestra, as well as a variety of enrichment opportunities, such as chess, Photo shop, school newspaper, graphic novels, cheerleading, hands-on science, and community service, to name a few. Progress After adopting and implementing a Common Core, research-based program in Kindergarten through Grade 8, The SEEALL Academy evidences strength in their significant improvement in ELA and mathematics achievement. On the 2018 state exams, 62.2% of students met state standards on the State English Exam (17% higher than the city average and 10% higher than the previous school year) and 60.5% of students met State standards on the State Math Exam (15% higher than the city average and 3.5% higher than the previous school year). Additionally, the school was rated "Excellent" in the areas of Collaborative Teachers, Effective School Leadership, and Trust, and "Good" in the areas of Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment, and Student Achievement on the school's most recent (2016-17) School Quality Snapshot. 1  Key Areas of Focus A challenge for the school, and the school’s greatest areas of focus, however, is the performance of our English Language Learners (ELLs) on the New York State English Language Acquisition Test (NYSESLAT). As our population of English Language Learners grows, we seek to adapt new ways to build the capacity of our English as a New Language (ENL) program. In the 2018-19 school year, our first Spanish Transitional Bilingual Education Integrated Co-Teaching (TBE ICT) class will enter the third grade. We also have restructured student placement to better serve our entering and emerging ELLs. In addition, the results of the 2017 New York City School Survey revealed a score of 2.41 in the area of "Strong Family-Community Ties," dropping from 3.46 in the previous school year. In the 2017-18 school year, we are committed to improving relationships with parents and organizations to better serve the needs of our school community. 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 20K180 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1136 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 44 38 53 20 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 45 21 22 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 88.0% % Attendance Rate 82.4% % Reduced Lunch 30.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 27.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 25.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 12.13 1% 7% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 62.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 83% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO NO N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 103 105 4 96.4% 5.5% 15.1% 0.8% 45.6% 1.3% 8 16% 5.5 60.5% 69% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A NO YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. 2.  The school was rated "Excellent" in the area of "Closing the Achievement Gap" for ELLs in both ELA and mathematics.  According to the 2017 ELL Data Analysis Tool (EDAT), 7.9% of ELLs have remained an ELL for at least 5 years.  Of the NYSESLAT test takers 32% remained at the same proficiency level.  The percent of English Language Learners scoring a proficient level (three or four) on the 2015 New York State Mathematics Exam was 23.3%, dropping from 27.6% in the previous school year.  New York State Commissioner's Regulations (CR) Part 154 has been amended in 2015 such that integrated English as a New Language (ENL) is now a mandated delivery model in which students receive core content area and English language development instruction from a dually certified teacher or two certified teachers. After analyzing these results of the Quality Review, School Survey, School Quality Snapshot, and School Quality Guide, PS/IS 180 The SEEALL Academy recognizes the needs for instruction that addresses the Capacity Framework Element of Rigorous Instruction , and seeks to improve the expectations that are set in every classroom. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the number of English Language Learners (ELLs) advancing at least one proficiency level on the NYSESLAT will increase from 30% of test takers to 40% through the implementation of data inquiry across vertical and horizontal teacher teams and adoption of the advanced literacy model specifically targeting the ELLs. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? September 2018 through June 2019 Instructional Assistant Principals Instructional Coaches ENL Teachers Content-Area Teachers   development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). In the 2018-19 school year, a kindergarten Mandarin Transitional Bilingual Integrated Co-Teaching (TBE ICT) will be piloted, in addition to our current third grade Spanish TBE ICT  ENL teachers will be paired up with a teacher on each grade level to provide appropriate ENL instruction to students of at all levels (entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding and commanding)  ENL teachers and classroom/content-area teachers will have weekly common planning time built into their programs. During this time, they will update current curriculum maps to reflect supports and scaffolds for English Language Learners (ELLs), with a specific focus on English language acquisition (reading, writing, listening, and speaking) Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts and Mathematics (STEAM) education will be implemented as part of regular classroom instruction as well as afterschool activities and enrichment, through a partnership with the Federation of Italian-American Organization for students in grades six through eight.   The school will host a STEAM Fair in Spring 2019, to showcase project-based learning  The "Math Madness" and "ELA Everyday" initiatives will promote student enthusiasm and understanding in the area of mathematics and ELA  Adoption and implementation of the advanced literacy model with comprehensive curriculum that encompasses all hallmarks: text variety, speaking opportunities, extended writing, and high-utility vocabulary words. English Language Learners Former English Language Learners Second-Grade English Language Learners Grade 6-8 Students   Students in kindergarten through grade 8 will be required to engage in project-based learning, for a minimum of two units of study. This project-based learning will be differentiated to meet the needs of all students, including Students with Disabilities and ELLs. Special education teachers and English as a New Language (ENL) teachers will utilize Tuesday afterschool time allotted for “Professional Responsibilities” to English Language Learners September 2018 – June 2019 Students with Disabilities Assistant Principals Special Education Department ENL Teachers 5 collaborate, modify curriculum, and create appropriate scaffolds for students in all subgroups. Students in the Lowest Third  The school will host family interactive nights in Fall 2018 All parents and Spring 2019, in addition to our four regularly scheduled parent-teacher conferences.  Parent and student orientation for incoming Pre-Kindergarten, Kindergarten, and sixth grade students will be held in the summer and fall prior to the school year. Expectations and program requirements will be discussed.  The School Leadership Team and Parent Teacher  Association will be invited to partake in preparation, planning, and implementation of the school’s STEAM Fair. In conjunction with the Title I Parent Committee, the SEEALL Academy will dedicate the Parent Engagement Blocks in March to parent/child mathematics homework help. June 2018 – June 2019 Parent Coordinator School Leadership Team Parent Teacher Association Title I Parent Committee  Teachers across content areas will host professional All teachers development for their colleagues and a sharing-out of best practices. September 2018– June 2019 Content area teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our parent coordinator will host regular workshops related to the topics of cyber bullying and Internet safety, peer relationships, and the importance of home support. In addition, our literacy specialists in collaboration with ENL department will host monthly workshops for parents with English as a New Language lessons. Curriculum night in September will allow parents to familiarize themselves with grade-level content and curriculum, and develop a relationship with their child's teachers. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Common planning time for literacy and social studies teachers (Monday/Tuesday after-school time)  New York City English Language Learner Policy and Reference Guide 2017-18  Summer planning for implementation of New York State Commissioner's Regulation (CR) Part 154 (approximately 5 hours per ENL teacher) STEAM-related Professional Learning Opportunities (on Monday afternoons, as well as opportunities provided by the district and DOE)   Use of Monday Professional Development time (2:30 pm – 3:50 pm) to provide learning opportunities for ENL and content-area teachers to collaborate FIAO academic and enrichment afterschool program for students in grades three through eight  6  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Benchmark: Portfolio Analysis (January 2019) Assessment Results-Each conducted 3 times in the school year  Running Records  Tri-Annual Assessments  Mock Exams  Sampling of student portfolios and assessment through a rubric and checklist to determine if instruction across content areas is rigorous and appropriately scaffolded for all students, especially ELLs.  Assess progress of curriculum writing to ensure completion before the end of the school year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Running records, tri-annual assessments and mock examinations Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1.  In the 2016-17 school year, PS/IS 180 The SEEALL Academy implemented a theme of “Unity” to promote Respect for All. For 2017-18 the student government, under the direction of the guidance counselors, has established a central theme of "Respect." 2. 3.  The 2016-17 New York City School Survey cited that "Safety" under the component "Supportive Environment"  was 3% below the district average. In addition, only 49% of students responded that "most students behave well even when the teacher isn't watching."  7% of students strongly agree that “students are often harassed or bullied in school” and 5% strongly disagree that “order and discipline are maintained.” Also, 10% of students disagree that they “feel welcome at school.”  The SEEALL Academy promotes a nurturing school environment. Social-emotional learning and opportunities for positive reinforcement through our guidance and dean departments. The school houses a GROWTH center ("Gaining Respectful Outcomes With Total Harmony") to nurture and educate the whole child. After analyzing these results of the School Survey, and reflecting on the work that was done in the previous school year, PS/IS 180 The SEEALL Academy recognizes the need for enhanced system and structures that address the Capacity Framework Element of Supportive Environment. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the results of the New York City School Survey Report, in the areas of bullying and order and discipline, will improve by 5%, with at least 30% of students reporting that bullying occurs "none of the time" (up from 25%) by implementing social emotional learning opportunities for students across all grade levels, parents, and staff. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  “Teamwork Day” will be implemented and facilitated by guidance counselors in October 2018. All students  Teamwork-related activities to promote unity as a school, such as “Teamwork Quote Contest,” presentations, and lessons provided by guidance counselors during town hall and student assemblies.  A “Get Caught Doing Good” ticket system will serve as positive reinforcement in grades K through 5.  The Gaining Reflective Outcomes With Total Harmony (GROWTH) Center is available for students to reflect upon their choices and learn from their mistakes.  Under the direction of the guidance counselors, students will orchestrate a school-wide art project geared towards teamwork and respect that will be displayed prominently throughout the building. Ongoing throughout the school year Assistant Principal for Safety and Discipline Guidance Counselors Deans Grade Leaders/ Department Heads Student Leadership Team ARISTA/ARCHON Societies Assistant Principals Guidance Counselors  All students, including SWDs and ELLs will participate in teamwork and anti-bullying related activities.  Upper grade students will serve as translators for students in grades K through 2 during anti-bullying and Respect for All lessons.  Cyber-bullying awareness lessons will be provided for students in all grade levels by February 2019. English Language Learners September 2018 – June 2019 Students with Disabilities February 2019 Dean  In December 2018, the parent coordinator will host an International Dessert Day, where parents are invited to bring in food reflective of their diverse cultures.  The PTA will collaborate in facilitating teamwork-related All parents activities. Technology Teachers Parent Coordinator Parent Teacher Association December 2018 September 2018 - June 2019 9  The school will host family interactive nights in Fall 2018 and Spring 2019, in addition to our four regularly scheduled parent-teacher conferences.  Peer-tutoring  Buddy program in the elementary school  Teachers across content areas will host professional development to their colleagues and a sharing-out of best practices. All students September 2018 – June 2019 Guidance Counselors Deans Grade Leaders/ Department Heads 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Our parent coordinator will host regular workshops related to the topics of cyber bullying and Internet safety, peer relationships, and the importance of home support. In addition, our literacy specialists in collaboration with ENL department will host monthly workshops for parents with English as a New Language lessons. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Guidance counselors, administration, and classroom teachers  Guidance-created lesson plans and curriculum for teamwork-related activities and to encourage anti-bullying.   Gaining Reflective Outcomes With Total Harmony (GROWTH) Center Scheduling arrangements for guidance counselors to visit classrooms and provide anti-bullying lessons Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Benchmark: Tracking Disciplinary Data (January 2019) PS/IS 180 The SEEALL Academy will analyze disciplinary data, including the number of incidents and the number of suspensions at the midway point. In addition, guidance counselors will conduct teacher and student surveys regarding effectiveness of anti-bullying activities in promoting a safe learning environment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Disciplinary data (ie, number of suspensions, teacher removals, etc.) 0  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. 2.  The school made significant gains on the 2018 English Language Arts state examination, with 62.2 % of students achieving a level 3 or 4, a jump of 9.9% from the previous school year, and an all time high Principal Williams' tenure.  The results of the 2018 state examinations revealed that while the number of students achieving a level 3 or 4 in ELA improved by nearly 10%, the results remained stagnant in mathematics with 60.5 % achieving a level 3 or 4, up only 3.5% from the previous year.  An emphasis must be placed on student progress rather than performance, especially in the lower grades.  The results of the school’s most recent Quality Review cited that instructional practices must be enhanced to provide multiple entry points and high quality supports for all subgroups. In addition, there is a need for “targeted questioning during the mini lesson [to be] scaffolded to students’ instructional levels.” After analyzing the results of the School Quality Guide and Quality Review, all constituents at PS/IS 180 The SEEALL Academy recognize the need to work together with an ultimate goal of progress for lowest performing students through the Response to Intervention (RTI) instructional protocol model. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 the performance of the lowest performing students on the New York State Exams in English Language Arts (ELA) and Mathematics will improve from 362 to 440 students scoring a level three or four in ELA and from 379 to 450 scoring a level three or four in Mathematics, an increase of 10%, through the implementation of the Response to Intervention (RTI) instructional protocol model, Schoolwide Steering Initiative, and restructuring curriculum to implement advanced literacy for our ELLs. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? June 2018 – June 2019 Assistant Principal for Special Education Instructional Assistant Principals School-based RTI specialist K – 5 Teachers  Response to Intervention (RTI) is a multi-tiered problem solving approach that identifies general education students struggling in academic and behavioral areas early, and provides them with systematically applied strategies and targeted instruction at varied levels of intervention.  Reading Street baseline literacy assessments and Envision Mathematics baseline assessments are administered to students the first week of school to ensure that at-risk students are identified early in the school year. Teachers College Running Records are administered and analyzed school wide to indicate specific areas of need for literacy development.  To increase early literacy development, The Orton Gillingham Methodology will be utilized by classroom teachers, RTI specialists, and AIS providers as an alternative method of instruction in grades K-5.  Repeated assessments of student achievement, which Students in grades K through 5 Early childhood Students Students in the Lowest Third Students with a low Growth Percentile on the 2018 State Exams   includes differentiated curriculum based measures, determine if interventions are resulting in student progress toward meeting the standards. Intervention cycles are scheduled to last 6 to 8 weeks. If a student is making progress with the applied intervention, the intervention is continued. If a student does not make progress within 3 to 4 weeks, a new intervention will be applied to target the student’s individualized need(s), within that cycle. Students who do not show progress after three consecutive cycles of intervention in literacy development will then be referred for special education services, with parental consent. Students identified in grades K-5 will respond to individualized interventions resulting in academic success in the general education classroom by June 2018.  A "Steering Committee" will be formed, with ten teachers targeting the lowest fifty students in grades four to eight through data inquiry and tracking progress. Students receiving at-risk s Special Education September 2018 – June 2019 Special Education Assistant Principal 3 These teachers will also serve as mentors to these students.  Differentiated and individualized activities will be incorporated in daily lesson plans and small group instruction.  Teachers will utilize graphic organizers, reciprocal  teaching methodologies, and the interactive writing process through the Gradual Release teaching model. Instruction is matched to individual students’ needs with increasingly intensive levels of targeted intervention and instruction for students who are not making satisfactory progress on the Teachers College Running Record Assessment. Teacher Support Services (SETSS) English Language Learners, K – 5 Special Education Department ENL Teachers  PS/IS 180 The SEEALL Academy will host family interactive nights in Fall 2018 and Spring 2019 that includes information on the RTI model and its process. We will host workshops that provide parents with available resources, supplemental materials, and strategies for best practices that parents can utilize at home.  The RTI team will attend regularly scheduled parent meetings to share information, update parents on each Tier of targeted interventions, and respond to parent questions and inquiries in languages other than English.  RTI case managers will send home informational packets to support and encourage literacy development at home that match interventions taking place at the school level. Parents of students in Grades K – 5 September 2018 – June 2019 Parent Coordinator Parent Teacher Association School-based RTI Team  PS/IS 180 The SEEALL Academy believes in educating and informing all teachers, parents, and stakeholders involved in the RTI process. Transparent communication between all constituents will be implemented. Parents and Teachers of students in K – 5 September 2018 – June 2019  The RTI Team will host professional development for their colleagues and a sharing-out of best practices. Instructional Assistant Principal Special Education Assistant Principal K – 5 Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our parent coordinator will host regular workshops related to the topics of cyber bullying and Internet safety, peer relationships, and the importance of home support. In addition, our literacy specialists in collaboration with ENL department will host monthly workshops for parents with English as a New Language lessons. Curriculum night in September will allow parents to familiarize themselves with grade-level content and curriculum, and develop a relationship with their child's teachers. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 4  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Partnership with FIAO to provide afterschool academic support  The school-based RTI team, including guidance counselors, speech providers, special education teachers, general education teachers, AIS providers and the RTI specialist, will meet bi-weekly to analyze student progress throughout all tiers of the process.  The RTI specialist will have flexibility in her program to be able to meet with teacher teams during common planning.  A Tier 2 and Tier 3 research-based instructional program, such as My Sidewalks by Pearson, will be utilized during the RTI process.  The Tuesday after school Parent Engagement block (2:30 pm – 3:10pm) will be utilized for parent meetings with teams of teachers to discuss student progress.  During Monday Professional Development time (2:30 pm – 3:50 pm), learning opportunities will be provided by the RTI specialist, and UFT Teacher’s Center staff for teachers in grades K through 5. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Benchmark: Tier 1 intervention success (students not needing Tier 2) above 60% (December 2018) The RTI team will analyze cases that have been presented in the beginning of the school year, and analyze student progress towards meeting individual goals as they move through the various tiers of RTI. Benchmark: ELA and Math Mock Examinations (February 2019) Teachers serving grades 3 through 8 will utilize mock examinations as a data tool to identify students, particularly in the lowest third, who are still at risk at this point in the school year, Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Mock examinations, Number of students moving from Tier 1 to Tier 2 in RTI, Running Records results Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. 2.  The results of the 2016-17 School Quality Snapshot revealed a rating of “excellent” in terms of how well teachers work with each other and how clearly high expectations are communicated to the staff.  The results of the school’s most recent Quality Review cited an improvement in Quality Indicator 4.1, "Teacher Support and Supervision"  The 2018 New York City School Survey Report cited that 94% of teachers say that their professional development experiences this year have been sustained and coherent (the lowest percentage in that component)  9% of teachers disagree with the statement, “overall, my PD experiences have been sustained and coherently focused, rather than short term and unrelated,” and 18% of teachers disagree that professional development is “tailored to [their] development needs.” After analyzing the results of the School Quality Snapshot, the School Survey Report, and the Quality Review, PS/IS 180 The SEEALL Academy recognizes the need to continue to nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff in regards to the Capacity Framework Element Effective School Leadership. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of eligible teachers in Kindergarten through grade 8 will be provided with appropriate, differentiated professional development based on the needs identified in the prior school year and through ongoing informal and formal observations through the Advance teacher rating system. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).   A Measures of Student Learning (MOSL) Committee and Professional Development Committee will be created in June 2018. School administrators will be provided with in-house training led by talent coaches. School administration, in consultation with the PD Committee, will create a flexible PD Plan based on teacher evaluations from the previous school year, instructional goals, and ongoing teacher evaluations.  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Assistant Principals PD Committee MOSL Committee  The Monday Professional Development block (2:30 pm – 3:50 pm) will be used for ongoing, differentiated professional development for teachers, beginning in June 2018, led by Administration, MOSL Committee, and/or Coaching Staff.  Administration will seek to provide timely (within 5 school days) feedback to teachers regarding formal and informal observations.  Inter-visitations and learning walks with instructional foci, such as the ICT model, and differentiation for SWDs and ELLs, will be scheduled across all grade levels.  Administrators and teacher teams will partake in the Teachers of Students with Disabilities Showcase Schools initiative, visiting schools with proven success. English as a New Language Teachers  Parents will be informed as to the intricacies of Advance All parents and how the new system will impact their children through PTA meetings in the morning and evenings, at parent workshops, and at Community Education Council meetings. In some cases, students will be involved in additional assessments (i.e., NYC Baseline Assessments).  Parents will also be made aware of the fact that due to the increase in the number of observations each teacher is receiving, it is likely that students will notice an increased presence of administration in the classroom. September 2018 – June 2019 School Administration Special Education Department ENL Teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Parent Coordinator School Leadership Team Parent Teacher Association 7  Correlations between the NYC School Survey, parent meeting feedback, and informal observation data will be analyzed to plan workshops for teachers and parents.  Teachers will open up their classrooms to colleagues, All teachers  hosting inter-visitations and learning walks. Sessions for sharing best practices will be built into the Professional Development schedule throughout the school year. September 2018 – June 2019 School Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our parent coordinator will host regular workshops related to the topics of cyber bullying and Internet safety, peer relationships, and the importance of home support. In addition, our literacy specialists in collaboration with ENL department will host monthly workshops for parents with English as a New Language lessons. Curriculum night in September will allow parents to familiarize themselves with grade-level content and curriculum, and develop a relationship with their child's teachers. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Instructional Coaches  Professional Development (PD) Committee   The Danielson Framework for Teaching  Data analysis tools on the Advance intranet page  Monday Professional Learning time (2:30 pm - 3:50 pm)  Tuesday Parent Engagement block (2:30 pm - 3:10 pm)  Tuesday Professional Activities block (3:10 pm - 3:45 pm) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Benchmark: Staff Survey (November 2018) Benchmark: Rating Analysis (February 2019) School administrators, along with the PD committee, will conduct a survey of school staff members to assess efficiency of professional development that has been offered throughout the school year. In addition, school 8  administrators will assess if targeted professional development has resulted in improved ratings for select components in Charlotte Danielson’s Framework for Teaching . Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Informal, school-created staff survey using Survey Monkey to assess professional development provided to teachers, Advance Intranet Measures of Teacher Practice (MOTP) Reports to analyze whether various components are showing improvement based on professional development provided by the school Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1.  For the past three school years, PS/IS 180 The SEEALL Academy hosted annual Family Interactive Nights. These evenings served as a forum for providing parent workshops and informational sessions, especially regarding Special Education. In the 2017-18 school year, the school seeks to improve the success of events such as this by increasing the number of parent interactive nights and overall parent involvement in the school community. 2.  The results of the New York City Survey convey that only 53% of parents/guardians responded that "since the beginning of the school year, they have been asked or had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school...sometimes or often."  The 2016-17 School Quality Guide reported the lowest rating of "Fair" in the area of Strong Family-Community ties. This was the lowest rated component. After analyzing the results of the School Survey and parent attendance at school functions and events during the 2015-16 and 2016-17 school years, PS/IS 180 The SEEALL Academy recognizes the need to increase parent involvement with regards to the Capacity Framework Element Strong Family and Community Ties . Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, our parent involvement in school activities and functions, including parent-teacher conferences and family interactive nights, will increase by 5% as evidenced by records of parent attendance at Parent-Teacher Conferences, Parent Teacher Association (PTA) meetings, parent workshops, school productions, and other school events. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Collaborate with PTA president to stagger evening and morning PTA meetings throughout the school year.  Collaborate with parent members of the School  Leadership Team and PTA to determine the greatest areas of need and interest within the parent community Increase number of parent nights from two to six, including two interactive nights, two Parent/Teacher conferences, a curriculum conference, and a family night in May.  Revamping and revising methods of parent communication to include maintaining a website, email correspondence, a pasting book for important memos and letters, and a phone message system, including appropriate translations.  Expanding our phone messaging system to include text messaging services for interested parents.  Engrade, an online grade book that is currently being used in grades 3-8, will be expanded to include Grades K - 2 in the 2018-18=9 school year.  ELL teachers will design training and host monthly ELA workshops and information sessions with parents of ELLs. The workshop materials used will be translated and interpretation support will be provided in the dominant languages spoken by parents in the school.  ELL teachers and teachers of SWDs will design and host training workshops to provide information to parents. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All parents, Pre-K – 8 1-5 Teachers (Engrade) September 2018 – June 2019 Assistant Principals Parent Coordinator Parent Teacher Association School Leadership Team September 2018 – June 2019 School Administration Special Education Department ENL Teachers Parents of English Language Learners Parents of Students with Disabilities  The school will host family interactive nights in Fall 2018 All parents and Spring 2019, in addition to our four regularly scheduled parent-teacher conferences, and create a parent resource library with user-friendly instructional materials and guides in languages other than English. School records indicate that high parent turnout occurs when there is a specific focus for the evening (i.e., “Celebrating Student Excellence,” “Honor Roll Night,” “Family Interactive Night,” and “Celebrating Student  September 2018 – June 2019 Parent Coordinator School Leadership Team Parent Teacher Association 1 Achievement”). To increase parent attendance at the spring Parent Teacher Conference, we will determine a specific focus for the evening, in addition to providing a workshop/professional development to accompany the focus.  The school will create and distribute a parent handbook that is translated in multiple languages.  The Tuesday Parent Engagement Block (2:30 pm – 3:10 pm) will be restructured to include a menu of options for parents and teachers. The School Leadership Team will create a “Parent Engagement Subcommittee” to design a schedule of workshops for parents throughout the year based on needs and interests.  Based on preliminary feedback, some of these workshops might include: Getting to Know You, Tune Up Tuesdays, How to Help Your Child with Homework, CPR, Mommy and Me Art Lessons, Delve into the Common Core All parents and teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Assistant Principals School Leadership Team Teacher Teams 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Federation of Italian American Organization Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  The Tuesday after school Parent Engagement block (2:30 pm – 3:10pm) will be utilized as a forum for teachers to facilitate all forms of parent communication (electronically, phone conferences, meetings, etc.)  Appropriate teacher training for the use of Engrade , the online grade book, will be provided to teachers in grades 3 through 5  Regularly scheduled meetings with parent-coordinator, PTA members, and staff members will be used as a forum to devise activities to increase parent involvement. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG X X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Benchmark: Parent Attendance at Curriculum Conferences and Parent Teacher Conferences (September 2018, November 2018) 2  Parent attendance data will be analyzed to determine how many students have one or more parent/guardian attending these events. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent attendance data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) -“Extra Help” Program -Small group -One-to-one -Strategies for Success Afterschool Program -Push-in/Pull-out -During the school day (Extra Help) -Strategies for Success Wednesday and Thursday Afterschool Program Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) -Students who have received 2.20 or lower on previous year’s ELA exam -Recommendations from Response to Intervention (RTI) team and Pupil Personnel Team (PPT) -Teacher and/or parent recommendations -Study Skills -Reading and Writing Strategies -Direct Instruction -FIAO Afterschool Program (Grades 1 through 8) -Saturday Academy -Students who have dropped a significant amount on previous year’s ELA exam (.75 or more) -Repeated Readings -Graphic organizers -Students failing literacy, or at risk of failing (Level 1 and/or below 65%) -Checklists/Rubrics -Charts, diagrams, and tables -Picture walks 4  Mathematics -Students who have received 2.20 or lower on previous year’s Mathematics exam -Recommendations from Response to Intervention (RTI) team and Pupil Personnel Team (PPT) -Reading Street Leveled Readers -My Sidewalks RTI Program -Novel Studies -“Code X” literacy program -“Ready NY CCLS” literacy program -“Crosswalk Coach for the Common Core State Standards” resource -Teacher’s College Reading and Writing Project (TCRWP) Running Records -“Extra Help” Program -Small group -One-to-one -Strategies for Success Afterschool Program -Push-in/Pull-out -During the school day (Extra Help) -Strategies for Success Wednesday and Thursday Afterschool Program -Manipulatives -Number lines and number charts -Direct Instruction -FIAOAfterschoolProgram (Grades 1 through 8) 5  Science -Checklists/Rubrics -“Ready NY CCLS” mathematics program -Envision Mathematics Program(re-teach/re-visit component) -“Zeroes Are Not Permitted” (ZAP) Program -“Crosswalk Coach for the Common Core State Standards” math resource -“Extra Help” Program Reading -Extended Day Science Regents Program -Reading and Writing in Science -Teacher and/or parent recommendations -Students who have dropped a significant amount on previous year’s math exam (.75 or more) -Students failing mathematics, or at risk of failing (Level 1 and/or below 65%) -Students failing science, or at risk of failing (Level 1 and/or below 65%) -Recommendations from Response to Intervention (RTI) team and Pupil Personnel Team (PPT) -Teacher and/or parent recommendations -Small group -During the school day (Extra Help) -Push-in/Pull-out -Regents Afterschool Program -Direct Instruction --FIAOAfterschoolProgram (Grades 1 through 8) 6  Social Studies -Students failing social studies, or at risk of failing (Level 1 and/or below 65%) -“Extra Help” Program -Time for Kids -Small group -During the school day -Push-in/Pull-out -FIAOAfterschoolProgram (Grades 1 through 8) -Recommendations from Response to Intervention (RTI) team and Pupil Personnel Team (PPT) -Teacher and/or parent recommendations At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) As needed based on teacher, parent, RTI, and/orPPT recommendations -Direct Instruction -Scholastic News -Current Events Study -Reading and Writing in Social Studies -Counseling -Small group -During the school day -Social Worker -One-to-One -Speech Teacher -Classroom visits -Occupational Therapy -Special Education Teacher Support Services (SETSS) 7  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 39 (doubled-up) 4 (other temporary living situation) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Basic emergency supplies Basic academic supplies Academic support services At-risk counseling Parent Coordinator outreach to families to assess needs Assistance in coordinating transportation Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 8  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 9  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified.  Administrative staff conducts interviews in teams to ensure teacher qualifications with specific knowledge in literacy development, methodologies for teaching SWDs and ELLs, and Common Core State Standards.  PS/ IS 180 The SEEALL Academy works closely with the New York City Department of Education Fellows Program to attract highly qualified teachers to our school.  Potential candidates are invited for an interview with the school’s hiring team, and asked to conduct a demonstration lesson. School leaders attend hiring fairs to identify and recruit highly qualified teachers.   The pupil personnel secretary will work closely with the Department of Education Human Resources to ensure that non-HQT meet all required documentation.  The United Federation of Teachers (UFT) representative will work closely with non-HQT to ensure appropriate coursework and documentation is being obtained to be on track for appropriate certification.  Non-HQT will be provided with differentiated professional learning opportunities focused around the content-areas and grade levels they are teaching.  Mentors are assigned to support struggling teachers, untenured teachers, or unqualified teachers.  Uniform observation protocol will be used to target and improve specific instructional practices based on individualized teacher need.  Teachers will receive direct, actionable feedback from administrators and support staff in a timely manner.  ELL Coordinator will work with the Office of English Language Learners to provide high quality staff development for ELL teachers and mainstream teachers of ELLs. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS).   Individualized needs assessment for all teachers will generate professional development workshops that improve teaching practices. School leaders and instructional coaches will analyze summative and formative observation feedback to determine common areas of need, and design and/or coordinate professional development based on those needs. After consulting with teacher teams, professional development in the form of presentations, inter-visitations, and instructional rounds will be scheduled on a regular basis (several times per month). When available, teachers will be encouraged to attend professional development outside of the school building. 0   Teachers will be encouraged to attend professional development opportunities including, but not limited to, the following topics: designing explicit instruction for SWDs, differentiation for all subgroups, use of language objectives based on the Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol (SIOP) model, and the Orton-Gillingham approach to reading instruction.  Teachers will have the opportunity to provide feedback regarding the quality of professional development at  department meetings and grade conferences. School leaders will analyze informal and formal observation feedback to identify teacher needs. Professional development workshops will be generated to improve teaching practices and strategies for diversifying teaching models and to assist in the development of units of study based on the Common Core State Standards with entry points for ELL and SWD subgroups. Administration and coaching support staff within the school will conduct professional development.  Professional development workshops will engage Pre-K - 8 pedagogues in designing Common Core Units in Literacy and Mathematics. The strategy workshops will be specifically designed to improve teaching practices and engage teacher teams in looking more closely at student work to understand the steps needed within an inquiry process to design standards-based units of study. In addition, developing scaffolding strategies for Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners will be a focus in creating these units.  Professional development opportunities will be provided to special education teachers as well as general education teachers in differentiated instruction for our students who are demonstrating a need for academic support. These professional development opportunities will be offered at the beginning and middle of the school year. We will consult with our Borough Field Support Center (BFSC) to refer us to RTI specialists who can provide professional development opportunities to our staff. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.).  Common Core Units of Study in Literacy and Mathematics for Pre-Kindergarten students  Curriculum Conferences hosted in September and May for all Pre-Kindergarten parents  Implementation of the Building Blocks mathematics curriculum, along with appropriate Professional Learning Opportunities for school leaders, and Pre-K teachers and paraprofessionals. 1   Regular parent involvement activities/workshops hosted by Pre-Kindergarten teachers  Monthly Title I Parent Workshops  Parent Coordinator will host informational sessions regarding Kindergarten applications  Use of Work Sampling System to track student progress in Pre-Kindergarten  Support from Pre-Kindergarten Instructional Coaches and Building Blocks Coach 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction.  The following teams are created in September 2018, and meet monthly thereafter: Instructional Team, Testing Team, Cabinet, Measures of Student Learning (MOSL) Committee, RTI Team, PPT, Professional Development Committee  Monthly grade/department meeting agendas will include monitoring student progress through the use of assessment (Running Records, baseline, benchmarks, mocks, midterm, etc.) results 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local $849,894 $19,720 $43,458 n/a $8,069,814 x x x n/a x 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, 2 Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 5A, 5C, 5E 5A, 5E n/a 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E  State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  3   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 4  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S./I.S. 180, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS/IS 180 The SEEALL Academy will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; and  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community Parental Involvement and School Quality 5  The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help;    The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; 6   encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS/IS 180 The SEEALL Academy, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;  using academic learning time efficiently;    offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships     conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  7   providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff  member; arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents    creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games;     promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;   participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;   become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 8   participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child;   III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 9  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 0  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: This year's Title III Afterschool Program is vital and necessary to our school Community because after a few years' experience in afterschool ELL academies, we have observed that the targeting of ELL's during the school day and after, positively affects their English language acquisition as well as their overall academic progress. Previous afterschool ELL academies have demonstrated improvement to ELL assessment scores. During the ELL Afterschool Program, ELL teachers will be able to target specific deficits shown by their students. This will be done in a classroom setting with less students, which research has shown, also positively affects ELL student academic outcomes. After conducting data analysis utilizing the EDAT (ELL Data Analysis Tool ), the Title III Afterschool Program's instructional focus will be on increasing reading and writing raw scores on the NYSESLAT for at risk students, defined as those ELLs who have an at-risk marker greater than 5 on the EDAT. The Title III Afterschool Program will be available to all in grades 3-8. Particular priority will be placed on our newly arrived ELLs in the middle school as they are grappling with learning English as well as keeping up with high order, content-specific academic language in their classes. Students will be grouped for instruction based on their current NYSESLAT proficiency scores and grade level, for a total of twenty-two sessions. Seven classrooms, each for each grade level will be used as well as seven certified ENL teachers. The ratio of students to teachers will be maintained at 1:15. A supervisor will be needed in spite of other programs are operating concurrently because the Title III supervisor will be responsible for carrying out the ELL focused curriculum as well as monitoring student progress in the form of a pre-diagnostic and a post-diagnostic assessment. The Title III Afterschool Program will be held at the school, Wednesdays and Thursdays, 2:40pm-4:40pm. The program will run from January 9, 2019 until March 28, 2019, excluding school holidays. The language of instruction for the Afterschool Program will be English, with heritage language support coming from heritage language books and resources to be purchased and made available in the classrooms. The Title III Afterschool Program will employ 7 New York State Licensed ENL Teachers who have proven record of effectively instructing ELL students for academic rigor and success. The following is a description of the instructional materials and assessments that will be utilized during the Title III ESL Afterschool Program. The SEEALL Academy uses a content-area focused, academically rigorous approach based on the Cognitive Academic Language Learning Approach (CALLA) model of language acquisition in conjunction with the sheltered English instructional support of the Sheltered Instructional Observation Protocol (SIOP) model. Through a detailed analysis of the ELL progress data and ongoing communication and strategy development between ENL and Content-area pedagogues, PS/IS 180 decided to use the Pearson Longman company’s programs to provide a consistent 3-8 1  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information solution for our ELLs. The Pockets, Keystone and Cornerstone series provide materials that promote academic language development through content area instruction and explicit instruction in learning strategies for both content and language acquisition. The structured assessment process is built in at every level of instruction, from diagnostic to book post-test and throughout each "Big Question" focused unit. The learning strategies used across the four language modalities include but are not limited to, identifying root words, learning sentences, word and text structures to develop grammar schema and enhance reading comprehension, graphic organizers, outlining, summarizing, the writer’s workshop editing process, finding the main idea and details, making predictions, inferences, context clues, cause and effect, drawing conclusions, genre reading, author studies, summarization, problem-solving, critical analysis and self-evaluation. The series includes a wide range of primary and support materials such as leveled textbooks with corresponding workbooks, audio CDs, DVDs with high interest videos for each unit, interactive student CD-Roms, eBook, and posters. Both fiction and non-fiction leveled authentic readers aligned with each unit are also available to provide additional support and build connections to the material as well as background knowledge. Teachers are provided with unit-based, well-organized instructional supports to assist in structuring daily lessons. Specific instructional strategies such as question and response (QNR), directed reading thinking activities (DRTA), scaffolding techniques like think alouds, reinforcing contextual definitions, as well as using gestures, modeling, manipulatives, interactive and integrated multimedia connect audio-visual medium are used to support key academic vocabulary and concepts, provide meaningful activities, create links between past learning and new concepts, all of which support culturally-responsive, needs-targeted differentiated instruction. The multilevel program blends research-based reading and language skills instruction together with a balance of content area readings and age-appropriate, high interest stories. Foundational phonics are integrated to support phonemic awareness as are academic vocabulary building skills all of which develop transferable academic skills in support of connected learning. In this way, our ELLs/FELLs/non-ELL immigrant students will be supported through-out their entire academic experience with differentiated materials that meet them at their levels with comprehensible content in a collaborative learning environment that meets them at their level and challenges them to reach above it. The support materials also reaches across the four language modalities with audio and video materials, interactive student e-book and interactive CD-roms which will be provided to content-area teachers to further support ELLs in their classrooms. Pearson also hosts a companion website that extends and supports learning with more interactive areas for students and teachers with additional online tools and resources for both. Additional support materials that work in tandem with required Common Core standards are classic literature books differentiated by vocabulary size that allow ELLs to read with their class at their level. The fully integrated assessment tools cover diagnostics through end of book assessments as well as individualized review materials by skill and by strategy. Students can be grouped by need and/or by class and differentiated materials can be created to reinforce, review or readdress those needs with the same content at every proficiency level. The aforementioned series are supplemental and distinct from those used for daily instruction. Student attendance will be recorded by each teacher during each session. Parent notification letters and invitations will be divulged in English as well as the parents' preferred language of communication. Attendance and parent letters will be filed in the office of the supervising Assistant Principal. 2  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: In addition to the teachers that will be providing the instructional component of the Title III program all staff members are encouraged to attend workshops. The workshops will be provided on Monday afternoons during our school's professional development time. This component is at no cost to the program because it will be provided by our ENL coordinator, Mr. Matias Wolkowicz, Ms. Pakulniewicz, ENL teacher, & Mr. Amato, ENL teacher. The ELL staff regularly turnkey to all other staff members ENL strategies in monthly faculty meetings and weekly department meetings. The ELL teachers also hold internal professional development sessions during lunch and learns, and on staff development days. In support of staff development, regular lunch and learns are held to introduce or continue to develop teaching strategies for ELLs that are taught during the Title III program. Professional development opportunities will be offered to the ENL department from the OELL to be turn -keyed to content-area teachers. Workshops highlighting implementation of strategies resulting from data will be prioritized as will sessions incorporating data gathering and analysis, and development of content-area strategies. Additionally, specialists in the SIOP and RTI instructional methods will hold workshops for all staff members, raising the level of our professional development. Future workshops will be determined by faculty survey in order to better support all staff members. The following professional development opportunities will help teachers who have ELLs in their classrooms better engage and provide appropriate entry points for ELLs at all proficiency levels. Relevant agendas and attendance sheets will be filed with the office of the supervising Assistant Principal. 2018-2019 Proposed Title III Professional Development Workshops: Differentiating Instruction for ELLs (1.5 hours) November 2018 ELLs and the ELA Test (1.5 hours) December 2018 Strategies for ELLs across the Content Areas (1.5 hours) January 2019 Assessment Strategies for ELLs (1.5 hours) February 2019 SIOP Component Enrichment (1.5 hours) March 2019 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered 3 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Begin description here: Title III, ELL parents will be invited to attend specialized workshops for parents of English Language Learners . Topics to be covered during these workshops include, how to maintain your heritage language while your child learns English and good study habits for ELLs, (December 2018, 1 hour session) What are some strategies I can use to help my ELL child achieve in school (January 2019, 1 hour session) how becoming involved in my child's school can benefit my child's academic progress (February 2019, 1 hour session), helping my ELL child get ready for the state exams (March 2019, 1 hour session) These workshops will be offered by our ENL staff with the assistance of translators and interpreters. The topics of these workshops were developed after the ENL Department received feedback from many parents of ELLs regarding information they feel could benefit both themselves and their children. Parents will be notified by letter in their language of preference. Agendas, attendance sheets and invitations in the parent's preferred language will be filed and maintained in the office of the supervising Assistant Principal. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 4  5  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 20 School Name The SEEALL Academy Borough Brooklyn School Number 180 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Gary M. Williams Coach Kathryn Gold ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Matias Wolkowicz Teacher/Subject Area Chris Gaffney, 3rd grade Teacher/Subject Area Amy Byrnes, 7th grade Related-Service Provider Rachel Gonzalez Superintendent Karina Costantino Assistant Principal Angela Panetta Coach Alan Moskowitz School Counselor R. Sciacca Parent Arlene Graziano Parent Coordinator Nicole Ferguson Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) Bobby Moy, Data Specialist C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 5 0 1 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 0 8 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 6  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1126 Total number of ELLs 346 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 30.73% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2017-18 K 0 1 4 3 2 1 Lang. Spanish Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 1 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? NYC Performance Assessments, running records, portfolios of student work, Interim Assessments and ITA Predictives are used to assess the literacy skills of our ELLs. The data gathered and analyzed through student work, class tests, and state assessments is used to evaluate the development of ELLs over several years. All teachers are provided NYSITELL and NYSESLAT results for three years and ELA and Math results for each student. ENL teachers consult with content-area teachers to review NYSESLAT scores as broken down by modality. The resulting data is used to direct instruction for the students as a group and as individuals (reference Part V Assessment analysis for details). NYSESLAT and ELA results led to the revamping of the ENL Department's program CALLA model of language acquisition. Below grade level response rates of the majority of ELLs highlighted the need for more specific and 7  rigorous content-area support for ELL students. Current data reveals that our ELLs require greater support in reading and writing, although many have shown progress in the listening and speaking sections of the exam. Advanced students remain the majority of our long-term ELLs and often miss scoring out by a small margin of points on the writing section. The higher the requirement for higher academic language, the lower the score for the ELL students as shown by the Math and Science scores for ELLs. For these reasons, the Instructional Assistant Principal , members of the ENL Department , grade and department leaders have agreed to collaborate with the ENL Department to align core curriculum in support of ELL academic development. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? All grade and department planning that takes place are attended by at least one ELL provider whose task is to assist teachers in developing ELL appropriate entry points into the curriculum. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Numerous measures address our evaluation of the success of our programs for ELLs. ELL progress on the NYSESLAT, ELA and Math state exams, where applicable, and other state exams are reviewed year-to-year. A more holistic picture is achieved when reviewing the previous year's AYP. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the summative data has been gathered by the ENL Department, it is disseminated by the ELL providers to all mainstream teachers who use that data to inform their instruction in an on-going basis throughout the year. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The ENL Department in conjunction with the Special Education Department, collaborate routinely when focusing on ELLs who are at-risk of being referred. The Special Education Department does not open any referral cases on ELL students until the student has been in the US over two years. Even if at-risk students have been here over two years, referral is not begun until a proper RTI framework interventions have been attempted and documented. The RTI framework consists of three tiers providing increasingly intensive, targeted instruction designed to match the student's learning needs, as shown by their performance on periodically administered assessments. Common interventions include Tier I which consists of rigorous and evidence-based curriculum which includes English language development for ELLs within their classroom. Tier II consists of extra activities targeted to specific students in addition to core instruction. Tier III is characterized by intensive individual attention to a small group or 1:1 instruction. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The ENL Department inquiry into ELL progress across proficiency levels has revealed a need to target reading and writing skills in the upper elementary and intermediate school. Trends suggest that as ELLs transition from elementary into intermediate school, they have a difficult time with reading and writing across the content-areas. As a result, the ENL Department has instituted an integrated/stand-alone model for ELLs who are struggling with reading and writing at the intermediate school level. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? As new data becomes available, and new needs are discovered, the ENL Department makes structural changes where appropriate to its delivery of service always noting to be in compliance with CR Part 154 Regulations on time mandates. Part IV: ELL Programming 8  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. We provide freestanding English as a New Language (ENL) stand-alone program model and integrated model for our ELLs. Regarding instructional units of ENL, as required under CR Part 154, entering and emerging level ELLs receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction per week, 180 minutes being stand-alone ENL and 180 minutes being integrated ENL. Transitioning and expanding level students receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction per week in an integrated ENL setting. Commanding students receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL for two years after they achieve commanding. The students are assessed in detail according to their NYSESLAT scores by modality, NYSITELL, ELA and classwork for grouping. The entering and emerging students are placed in relatively homogeneous groups, as are the transitioning and expanding students. Grades K, 1 and 5 are in graded groups although grades 2-4 and 6-8 are organized into ungraded groups by proficiency level. b. TBE program. If applicable. In academic year 2017/18, we opened a new TBE/ICT class in Spanish at the 2nd grade level. The class is staffed by one pedagogue who has a Common Branch license as well as a bilingual extension. The second instructor has a Special Education license. As mandated by CR Part 154-2, Emerging ELLs in the TBE/ICT class are programmed for 90 minutes of stand-alone ENL , 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA, 1 Home Language Arts (HLA) class and a minimum of two content-area subjects taught in Spanish. Transitioning ELLs receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA, 1 HLA class and at least 1 content-area subject taught in Spanish. Emerging students receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA, 1 HLA class, and at least 1 content-area subject taught in Spanish. Because we do not have any Entering students in the class, we programmed the CR Part 154 services with the requirements of our Emerging students, thereby satisfying the requirements for the Transitioning, Expanding and Commanding level students in the class. c. DL program. If applicable. n/a 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The ENL department is organized by school (Elementary and Middle) and grade band guided by the NYSESLAT. Grades K and 1 each have a single instructor to meet the academic and developmental needs of the students at that age and emotional developmental level. For grades 2 through 4, the instructor utilizes his 9 years of classroom experience as a 3rd grade teacher to prepare students for the rigorous needs of testing, as well as his background in ENL and Bilingual education, to support their English language acquisition, native language and schema across the content areas. The 5th grade also has one teacher and is arranged into graded homogenous groups to increase their focus and to prepare students to transition to the different academic approach of middle school. The middle school students are grouped by proficiency level to more intensely address their needs by modality. This is done to increase the efficiency of language acquisition by creating support for content area teachers using academically rigorous materials differentiated by proficiency level to create accessible content. All teachers, in every grade, have at least one freestanding ENL class, not focused on content-area instruction. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The SEEALL Academy uses a content-area focused, academically rigorous approach based on the CALLA (Cognitive Academic Language Learning Approach) model of language acquisition. Through a detailed analysis of the ELL data and ongoing communication and strategy development between ENL and content-area pedagogues, PS/IS 180 decided to predominately use the Pearson Longman companies programs to provide a consistent K-8 solution for our ELLs. The Pockets, Keystone and 9  Cornerstone series provide materials that promote academic language development through content area instruction and explicit instruction in learning strategies for both content and language acquisition. Heritage language support comes in the bilingual library housed in the ENL Classroom available to all our ELLs. We also provide heritage language dictionaries and glossaries to many of our ELLs. The multilevel program blends research-based reading and language skills instruction together, with a balance of content area readings and age-appropriate, high interest stories. Foundational phonics are integrated to support phonemic awareness as are academic vocabulary building skills all of which develop transferable academic skills in support of connected learning. The support materials also reach across the four language modalities with audio and video materials, interactive student e-book and interactive CD-roms which will be provided to content-area teachers to further support ELLs in their classrooms. Pearson also hosts a companion website that extends and supports learning with more interactive areas for students and teachers with additional online tools and resources for both. Additional support materials that works together with required Common-core standards are classic literature books differentiated by vocabulary size that allow ELLs to read with their class at their level. The fully integrated assessment tools cover diagnostics through end of book assessments as well as individualized review materials by skill and by strategy. Students can be grouped by need and/or by class and differentiated materials can be created to reinforce, review or readdress those needs with the same content at every proficiency level. We incorporate more kinesthetic learning, as well as technology, by purchasing Smartboards to reach both ELL students and address the Special Education ELLs. Additionally, integrated software programs that respond to student’s needs are being implemented for Special Education ELLs. All of these programs are possible with targeted use of Title III funding. With this level of reinforcement and consistency, our goal is to improve academic achievement across the board and accessibility to the CCLS through scaffolded, sustained instruction using targeted language development strategies. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their language by having a Bilingual Special Education Evaluator present at every IEP meeting of Special Education students who are ELLs. Non SWD students who are ELLs will be screened by screeners in their home language when necessary. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status SIFE students are supported through the both the newcomer strategies (see the below) and with the added support guidance counselor attention. Parents/guardians are also in regular communication with school staff from classroom teachers through office staff to ensure a positive learning environment is created for the SIFE student. There are various ways that we address the needs of newcomers. Newcomers are paired with a student “buddy” of the same language. Classroom teachers include newcomers in classroom activities as much as possible. When unable to do so, classroom teachers give the students a newcomer packet to work on individually. The ENL teacher collaborates with the classroom teacher to enable the development of the newcomers’ “survival” or basic English communication skills. As the students’ basic vocabulary grows, academic language is also developed through content area study in the ENL and mainstream classrooms. The ENL department in grades 2-8 use special newcomer materials that are heavily focused on academic language to further target their individual learning needs. Through a detailed analysis of the ELL data and ongoing communication and strategy development between ENL and Content-area pedagogues, PS/IS 180 decided to change the ENL program focus from balanced literacy to a content-area focused, academically rigorous approach based on the CALLA (Cognitive Academic Language Learning Approach) model of language acquisition for all ELLs to better target the needs of ELLs with 4 to 6 years of service. Their needs as determined by ongoing assessments are to build academic strength in reading and writing not just in language development but across the content areas. Special Education students whose Individualized Educational Plans (IEPs) recommend bilingual services receive alternative placements. Each student with a bilingual recommendation is paired with a bilingual paraprofessional in addition to receiving ENL services. The bilingual paraprofessional is with their assigned student during content area instruction and 0  throughout the school day. P.S./I.S. 180 has several ELLs that enter the ENL program in Kindergarten and stay in the program for several years. Effort is made to ensure that the students do not remain in ENL longer than is necessary. Our school offers afterschool programs and Academic Intervention Services (AIS) for Developing/Long Term ELL students that need additional support in reaching academic goals as well as supplemental intervention programs such as Ready Math and Reading Streets to support them in their content-area classes. Alternatively, students who score at the proficient level on the NYSESLAT (Former ELLS) are also given additional support. The classroom and ENL teachers carefully monitor the students’ progress as they transition into the mainstream classroom. Students who score at the proficient level on the NYSESLAT continued to receive ENL services for two years after they score out. The classroom and ENL teachers carefully monitor the students’ progress as they transition into the mainstream classroom. If the newly proficient student is having difficulty performing at grade level, various academic interventions are available. The student may receive Academic Intervention Services for thirty minutes daily. Through continued communication between ENL and content area teacher, if a student needs additional support or a need area is determined through assessment, the ENL teacher may include the student in ENL classes for supplemental assistance. All students are strongly encouraged to attend the Title III afterschool program. The instructional staff at P.S./I.S. 180 is very dedicated to increasing every student’s opportunities for success. In support of staff development, regular lunch and learns are held to introduce or continue to develop teaching strategies for ELLs. Professional development opportunities will be offered to the ENL department from the OELL to be turnkeyed to content-area teachers. Also, resources such as Progress and Status Reports have been developed and translated into different languages to encourage communication with limited English speaking Parents. These reports list positive behaviors and areas for improvement for students designed to increase parents’ understanding and involvement with their student’s class work and behavior. ENL Resource Libraries are in both the elementary and middle school assistant principals’ offices to provide teachers with differentiated support materials to provide comprehensible content throughout the content areas. ESL Department members also attend grade meetings, and content area department meetings as well as the Special Education meetings in order to promote communication and better support students ESL students are invited to participate in all enrichment activities including theatre, are, music and community service classes. Many enjoy participating in LOTE classes such as French, Spanish, Italian and Chinese. Some ESL students choose to support their native language development through their choice of LOTE while others explore a new culture and idiom. All ELL students are encouraged to use their native language to increase their basic literacy skills. The students’ literacy in the native language will be beneficial for the transfer of knowledge from their first language (L1) to the second language (L2), English. Students bring the prior knowledge acquired in the L1 and are taught appropriate strategies and skills that enable them to make this transfer to L2. For example, newcomers are paired with a buddy that speaks the same language. Also, there are bilingual materials available in the school library and in the ENL library. Parents are encouraged to read aloud to their children in their native language and in all ways encourage its development in all modalities. Native language development is further supported by the use of native language glossaries in the content area classes. Standardized tests are also offered in native languages whenever possible. Beginning this year, ENL classes now include focused content-area dictionaries with workbooks to reinforce development of academic language. To assist their acclimation to PS/IS180 before the school year begins, transitional meeting are offered for new students as well as those becoming middle school students for parents and students. Also, the regular PTA meetings offer translators and their time and date is relayed through the use of monthly calendars translated into native languages. All of which is part of the welcoming culture and environment at The SEEALL academy for our newest students. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELL teachers use CornerStone and Keystone from Longman/Pearson to assist in providing access to academic areas and accelerate English language development. Teachers also use a variety of realia and manipulatives in order to provide adequate entry points for our ELLs/SWDs. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 1  We use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable diverse ELL-SWD to achieve IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment by placing our at risk ELLs into AIS and offering placement into our Title III Afterschool Program. The ENL provider collaborates with the general education and the special education teacher in the ICT setting in order to ensure that ELLs who are also SWDs are working toward achieving their IEP goals. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Academic Intervention Services: ELLs who do not make set goals in ELA and Math State Assessments Extended Day Program: ELLs who are not making adequate gains are offered this extra resource. ELL students are matched to ELL teachers who deliver services in a smaller group setting Title III ENL Afterschool Program: All ELLs and FELLs are eligible for the afterschool program We use the data from the EDAT tool to help identify those ELLs that would benefit from these services. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? The ENL Department will seek to have a larger role in the RTI process as we see it as a helpful way of identifying at-risk ELLs and connecting them with higher tier interventions. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We are currently not considering the discontinuation of any of our programs. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs at all levels have equal access to each of our programs. Every ELL is eligible to attend our Title III afterschool program as well as any other program that targets at risk students. ELLs are invited by letter and fully participate in all at-risk programs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Teachers routinely use dedicated ELL websites to supplement their lessons, as well as realia, manipulatives, and visuals accordingly. Teachers utilize Imagine Learning to support entering ELLs, websites such as BrainPop ESL and Starfall to help supplement ELL learning. Imagine Learning has a heritage language component at the beginning that helps bridge our new ELLs into the English language. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The ENL Department delivers native language support by providing heritage language dictionaries and glossaries in different content-areas. State asssessments are available in LOTE for ELLs who could benefit from it. Our ENL classroom and library contain many bilingual books for our students to check-out. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All supports and resources provided for ELLs are tailored to the students' age and grade level. This is especially the case with our ELL libraries and bilingual books. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Teachers routinely use dedicated ELL websites to supplement their lessons, as well as realia, manipulatives, and visuals accordingly. Teachers utilize Imagine Learning to support entering ELLs, websites such as BrainPop ESL and Starfall to help supplement ELL learning. Imagine Learning has a heritage language component at the beginning that helps bridge our new ELLs into the English language. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). 2  Recently enrolled students identified as ELL during the school year are placed in specific, grade level newcomer groups in order, to address their specific needs. Our Parent Coordinator, Ms. Ferguson routinely holds informational sessions for the parents/guardians of new ELLs. The ELL providers are involved if one of their student is a new ELL. Information about school events is divulged in languages other than English. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Many of our advanced level ELLs are included in our school's LOTE program, which currently includes Chinese, Spanish, Italian, Latin and French. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? At this time, we do not have a Dual Language Program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? In support of staff development, regular lunch and learns are held to introduce or continue to develop teaching strategies for ELLs. Professional development opportunities will be offered to the ENL department from the OELL to be turnkeyed to content-area teachers. Workshops highlighting implementation of strategies resulting from data will be prioritized as will sessions incorporating data gathering and analysis, and development of content-area strategies. Specialists in ELLs will hold workshops for content–area as well ENL pedagogues, raising the level of our professional development for all instructors. Several companies have been researched and selections will be based on teacher and student areas of need. Additionally, Assistant Principals will hold workshops on new changes to ELL Policy and Procedures for school secretaries. 2018-2019 Proposed Professional Development Workshops Strategies for helping your ELLs access the CCLS November 2018 ELLs and the ELA Test December 2018 Strategies for ELLs across the Content Areas January 2019 Assessment Strategies for ELLs February 2019 NYSESLAT Pre-Assessment and Intervention March 2019 New ELL Policy and Procedures for School Secretaries April 2019 Current and new staff members continue to complete their Jose P training per the requirement with the hours charted by the school secretary, Ms Brauer. The above mentioned staff development plan also included teachers of ELLs. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Strategies for helping ELLs transition into Middle School will be offered in April, 2019 to 5 th grade teachers of ELLs. In collaboration with the guidance department, this workshop will help teachers of incoming 6 th graders get their students 3  ready both socially and academically for the change that middle school will bring to our ELLs. The ENL Coordinator at the school will collaborate with Administrators when they draft the following year's professional development calendar. The ENL Coordinator will assure that all teachers have the required 15% of total development hours for ELL-Specific professional development and that ENL teachers have 50% of total hours. Records will be stored with the ENL Department. Such records include, but are not limited to, agendas and attendance sign-in sheets. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The parent coordinator assigned to our school pays particular attention to parents of ELL students, especially newcomers to the English language school system. The parent coordinator and other staff members work together to create a welcoming and safe environment. All letters to parents will be distributed in English, Chinese, Spanish, Albanian, Polish, Arabic, Urdu, Bengali, and Russian, the predominate languages of our area. In cooperation with the ENL and other teacher, parent orientation meetings will be held in the fall and periodically during the year as new children arrive. Parents will be given information about free community-based Adult ENL and computer classes. Also, workshops will be given by the ENL department to assist ELL parents in supporting their children doing their homework, explaining the importance of continuing native language development, describing the exam types and functions as well as articulating other needs specific to ELLs. The monthly school calendar with all events and PTA meetings is handed out in both English and heritage languages to encourage awareness and active parental involvement. Breakout sessions are also planned at PTA meetings to reach parents in a small group setting with important information about their students, such as testing requirements and how they can assist. The parents can then express their challenges, which we as a school community can help to address. All meetings have interpreters available and where an interpreter of one language is unavailable, we utilize the translation hotline to assist in divulging the information in a LOTE. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. ELL parent involvement begins with the ENL Parent Orientation in October. All school activities such as PTA meetings, concerts, functions and informational meetings are open to our ELL parents and encoragement is fomented through the use of heritage language interpreters available at all our school-wide meetings. Our Parent Coordinator, Ms. Nicole Ferguson helps coordinate these events along with the ENL Coordinator and Department. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 4 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Gary Williams, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 5  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The SEEALL Academy School DBN: 20K180 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Gary M. Williams Title Principal Angela Panetta Assistant Principal Nicole Ferguson Parent Coordinator Matias Wolkowicz ENL/Bilingual Teacher Arlene Graziano Parent Chris Gaffney Teacher/Subject Area Amy Byrnes Teacher/Subject Area Alan Moskowitz Stacy Calderon Coach Coach Rosemary Sciacca School Counselor Karina Costantino Karina Costantino 6/30/18 Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Superintendent Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/30/18 6/30/18 6/30/18 6/30/18 6/30/18 6/30/18 6/30/18 6/30/18 6/30/18 6/30/18 6/30/18 6/30/18 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 6  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 20K180 School Name: The SEEALL Academy Superintendent: K. Constantino The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Nicole Ferguson LAC Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. It has been determined by looking at a sampling of our students' Home Language Identification Surveys (HLIS), filled out at initial registration by parents, that a large percentage of our students, both identified ELL's and non-ELL students reside in a home where English is not the primary language of communication. We also looked at the ATS Place of Birth (POB) report and came to a similar conclusion when we observed that most of our students were born outside the US in non-English speaking countries. It was therefore determined that both written and oral communication solely in English may be a hinderance to many of our families. Administration reached out to the ENL Department for possible solutions to this challenge. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 7  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral CHINESE ANY ENGLISH SPANISH RUSSIAN ARABIC BENGALI UZBEK POLISH ALBANIAN URDU HUNGARIAN TADZHIK CZECH GREEK ROMANIAN UKRAINIAN HEBREW MACEDONIAN PUNJABI PORTUGUESE TURKISH CANTONESE HINDI MANDARIN 659 618 395 192 28 26 26 15 14 14 10 10 3 2 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 32.61 30.58 19.54 9.5 1.39 1.29 1.29 0.74 0.69 0.69 0.49 0.49 0.15 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.05 0.05 0.05 0.05 0.05 0 0 0 468 608 398 191 30 28 24 13 13 16 10 9 2 2 2 4 1 2 1 1 1 20 1 176 23.16 30.08 19.69 9.45 1.48 1.39 1.19 0.64 0.64 0.79 0.49 0.45 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.05 0.1 0.05 0.05 0.05 0.99 0.05 8.71 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to School Calendar NYSESLAT results ENL Eligibility letters Monthly September September parents. Translation done in house Translation provided online Translation provided online 8  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide PTA Meetings Curriculum Night Open House ENL Orientation Monthly September September October interpretation service(s)? Interpreters available in house Interpreters available in house Interpreters available in house Interpreters available in house 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency, a robo call system is in place to place automated phone calls to parents/guardians. The messages are in English followed by translation into our higher occurring languages. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. At the beginning of the year, before our first Open House/Curriculum night, staff members will attend a meeting conducted by the ENL Dept in conjunction with the Parent Coordinator (who is also our LAC) where we will discuss the available options for translation. Some options are the face-to-face interpreters that will be "on call" in the PTA office. If one is not available, staff members will be informed of the DOE's Interpretation Hotline number. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The SEEALL Academy will fulfill Section VII of Chancellor's Regulations A-663 regarding parental requirements for translation and interpretation services by adhering to this locally-created Translation and Interpretation Plan, in line with the new requirements of Chancellor's Regulations A-663. Oral communication will be provided at all required events in languages other than English when requested by either a school-based staff member (preferably a trained pedagogue, when one is not available in that home language, an adult parent volunteer). All written communication 9  will be translated into languages other than English when requested by school-based staff such as teachers, paraprofessionals or parent volunteers. Through careful monitoring of our students' home language data, we have observed that most of our families communicate in a language other than English. It is understood by the entire school-community that information about student progress, health, safety, legal, disciplinary, placement information for Special Education, English Language Learner status and non-standard academic programs, must be made available to all parents in their preferred language. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The school will gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services by distributing a survey at the end of the year asking parents to assess their experience. Analysis of these surveys will shed light on successes and possible drawbacks that the school will be able to address. 0 
