 21K199 School Name: P.S. 199 FREDERICK WACHTEL Principal: ROSALIA BACARELLA   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 21K199 PS 199 332100010199 Pre-K to 5 1100 Elm Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 1230 718-339-1422 Phone Number: 718-336-5562 Fax: Gina Leahy gleahy@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Rosalia Bacarella Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 21 Superintendent’s Office Address: Andrew Rosenberg Elizaabeth Montalvo Gina Leahy Erica Agosto N/A N/A N/A District Information Isabel DiMola Superintendent: 1401 Emmons Avenue, Brooklyn, New York 11236 idimola@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-648-0209 Phone Number: 718-648-2165 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Brooklyn South Mauriciere DeGovia FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 415 89 th Street, Brooklyn, NY 11209 mdegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-759-4872 Phone Number: 718-759-4960 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Rosalia Bacarella Andrew Rosenberg Elizabeth Montalvo N/A Erica Agosto N/A N/A N/A Mariam Amir Uzma Riaz AytulSangiray *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent   Marcus Agosto Holly Fleischer Lisa Esposito Gina Leahy Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Assistant Principal Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The Mission of PS 199 is to instill a life-long love of learning and to foster self-esteem in every child. In addition, we strive to work with parents to meet the social, emotional and educational needs of all children so that they will be able to meet the challenge of their future college and career aspirations. We feel that literacy is the foundational skill in a well-rounded education, which is essential in order for children to become contributing citizens of our communities, country and world.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS 199 is a Pre-K to 5 school located in the diverse community of Midwood, Brooklyn. Of 546 students, 23% are Asian, 22% are Hispanic, 6% are black, and 48% are white. About 33% of our students are English Language Learners. This population has been steadily growing and we currently have 21 languages spoken in our school community. To address the needs of students with autistic disabilities, PS 199 also has an ASD Horizon program in Kindergarten through fifth grade. As a Teachers College Reading and Writing Project School, our ELA curriculum aligns to the Common Core Learning Standards and our teachers engage in a continuous cycle of planning, professional development and reflection on student achievement in reading and writing. Our math curriculum is based on Go Math! and Engage NY which emphasize fluency, conceptual understanding and problem solving. Content area studies in science and social studies focus on student inquiry and literacy based informational and argumentative writing supported by facts and details. PS 199 has a strong arts program, with arts instruction being provided by our own teachers and through partnerships with the New York City Ballet, Arts Connection and Music and the Brain. We also offer after school programs through the NIA Community Services Network for grades K-5. Grades 3-5 participate in Academic Intervention after school programs, as well as arts and enrichment programs. As a professional learning community, PS 199 has a strong culture of collaborative teachers. Our Quality Review states: "Teams of teachers meet regularly to systematically analyze their instructional practices and develop strategies for improving staff and student achievement. Distributive leadership structures facilitate teacher collaboration with school leaders to make critical decisions about teaching and learning across the school." Teachers on all grade levels have weekly common planning periods. During the Monday professional development period and the Tuesday professional activity period, teachers learn and work together. For example, our school focused on math instruction in the 2017-18 school year. Teachers participated in professional development with our consultant from Generation Ready, observed math lessons in each others classrooms, and reflected on their learning together in order to implement new teaching strategies in their own practice. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. About 33% of our students are English Language Learners (ELLs). This population has been steadily growing and we currently have 21 languages spoken in our school community. Our ELLs require intense support in literacy, as well as scaffolds to help them acquire content knowledge at the same time they are learning the language. The families of these students also require our support in navigating the New York City educational system and acclimating to a new culture. To meet the needs of students with autistic disabilities, PS 199 also has an ASD Horizon program in Kindergarten through fifth grade. Over the last 6 years, our school has been growing its experience and knowledge base in creating an inclusive and supportive environment which will enable students with autistic spectrum disorders to thrive both academically and socially. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. PS 199 continued to show strong results in the area of rigorous instruction. Utilizing common planning and Tuesday professional activities time, teachers engaged in looking at student work and developing instructional change strategies through a strategic data inquiry process. We implemented math Exemplars in 2016-17 which resulted in focused rigorous math problem solving consistently throughout the school. We continued this focus on math by engaging in District-wide professional development with Generation Ready and school specific PD with the same consultant. We plan to continue our focus and growth in math instruction in the 2018-19 school year. In 2018-19, PS 199 will begin a transition to the Engage NY math curriculum. We believe this new curriculum will provide our students with a more conceptual foundation in math concepts. We will continue this work with the guidance and support of Generation Ready educational consultants. 0  PS 199 will also focus on the Supportive Environment element of the Framework by providing students with social emotional learning supports through a CASEL-approved SEL program. In the 2017-18 school environment survey, only 54% of teachers responded that "a lot or all of the adults at their school recognize disruptive behavior as social-emotional learning opportunities." Implementing an SEL program will provide teachers with tools to better address disruptive behaviors and students' social and emotional needs. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 21K199 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 556 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 30 28 27 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 12 6 27 27 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 85.0% % Attendance Rate 79.7% % Reduced Lunch 31.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.5% 22.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 47.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 11.09 0% 13% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 49.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 92% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A YES N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 48 48 27 92.4% 4.3% 18.7% 5.4% 23.7% 1.3% 2 0% 8.7 51.0% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The 2018 Framework for Great Schools Report gives PS 199 a score of 4.47 for rigorous instruction. PS 199 earned a rating of Well Developed on all indicators of the Quality Review, including assessment which was cited as an area of focus. "All staff members gather data from assessments aligned to curricula, and use the data to provide staff and students with actionable feedback about student performance. However, while all staff members use data from common assessments to track student progress, strategic implementation of adjustments to curricula and instruction is not yet evident in all content areas." In 2016-17 we addressed this concern in math and ELA through data inquiry. In 2017-18, we implemented a data capturing system using Dropbox and School Data Corp. This provided teachers with analysis based on specific standards which they used to plan instruction that met individual student needs. Also, as a result of this work, the PS 199 Instructional Team decided to transition to the Engage NY math curriculum from the GoMath! program. This transition in math curriculum will be a major focus of our work in 2018-19. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of professional development and math coaching by our Generation Ready consultant, 75% of students in Grades 2 to 5 who scored at the Novice or Apprentice level on the fall benchmark Exemplar will increase at least one level. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Teachers will be provided professional development and instructional coaching by our consultant from Generation Ready during grade common planning meetings and on the Chancellor's Conference Day on November 6, 2018. Professional development will focus on best practices in building conceptual mathematical understanding and number sense, including implementing number talks and tasks that promote reasoning. Teachers will be coached on how to facilitate meaningful mathematical discourse and how to elicit and use evidence of student thinking. At least 2 sessions of professional learning in December 2018 will focus on how to meet the needs of ELLs and SWDs. These strategies will include how to scaffold language and mathematical vocabulary so ELLs can participate in mathematical discourse, as well as communicate their thinking. Principal, Assistant Principals, and Generation Ready consultant will map out a transition plan from Go Math! to Engage NY, present it to teachers for feedback and support teachers in implementing the plan. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teachers and Administrators Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Assistant Principals and Principal Sept. 2018 Principal Principal, Assistant Principals and Generation Ready Consultant Teachers will use their weekly common planning periods to plan lessons from Engage NY. During these planning sessions, particular attention will be given to planning scaffolds for ELLs and SWDs. Teachers will use at least one weekly common planning period per month to analyze math data, including data for ELLs and SWDs, to adjust curriculum and plan appropriate scaffolds and targeted instruction. All Grade K to 5 Classroom Teachers Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Assistant Principals and Principal All Grade K to 5 Classroom Teachers Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Assistant Principals and Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 4  Parents will be invited to September orientations in which an overview of the Engage NY math curriculum will be presented. Our Parent Engagement Teams will plan a Math Games Tuesday Afternoon which will provide them with hands on activities that they can use with their children to develop math skills. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Engage NY math curriculum, supplemented by Exemplars and GoMath!  Generation Ready Math consultant has been contracted for 13 days of PD and coaching.  Principal and Assistant Principals will participate and oversee the work, ensuring it is implemented in the classrooms. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 50% of students in Grades 2 to 5 that scored at a Novice or Apprentice Level on the fall benchmark Exemplar will have increased one level. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Exemplar rubric. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Establishing and maintaining an environment in which students feel safe, supported, and challenged is woven into the culture at PS 199. PS 199 has a full time Guidance Counselor who works with teachers and staff to ensure that students feel safe and supported. In addition to making herself available at critical times in the school day such as arrivals and lunch periods, the Guidance Counselor also coordinates a Service Learning Team and Program. This year, the Service Learning Team coordinated service projects with the themes of kindness, helping others and being an upstander. Each project was anchored by a school wide Read Aloud book and an outreach project which this year included a successful food drive and walk-a-thon which raised funds for Autism Awareness. In addition, this year's program also added an anti-bullying campaign, a Culture Day in which students came to school in the traditional dress of their culture, Sensory Day in which students learned about the sensory needs of autistic children, and a kindness recognition program, as well as various spirit days. Every student is well known by multiple teachers and staff who can be available to students or refer them to the Guidance Counselor when assistance is needed. The Guidance Counselor plays a critical role in supporting the emotional needs of students in the Horizon Program, as well. In 2017-18, PS 199 had one Principal’s suspension. Our attendance rate was 92.75%. We rated Well Developed on 3.4 of the Quality Review – Establish a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students, and families, and provide supports to achieve those expectations. We continued with Enrichment Clusters based on the Renzulli model of school wide enrichment. The success of this program, which engages students in project- and team-based learning, has provided academic enrichment and has contributed to a greater sense of community at PS 199. Our most recent school survey indicated that teachers do not feel that they have the tools to deal with disruptive behavior. Only 54% of teachers responded that "a lot or all of the adults at their school recognize disruptive behavior as social-emotional learning opportunities." Only 63% of teachers say they teach students the skill they need to help them regulate their behavior. In 2018-19, teachers will engage in professional development focused on increasing their understanding of social emotional learning through a CASEL-approved Social Emotional Learning program. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of teachers' greater understanding of students social emotional needs, how it affects student behavior and learning, and how to support students so that they may achieve academically, 75% of fifth grade students that scored between a level 2.0 to 3.5 on the 2018 ELA state assessment (26 students) will increase by .5 proficiency on the 2019 assessment (moving to a range of 2.5 to 4.0). 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  An SEL Team will be established with teacher representatives from all grades, ENL, and Special Education, as well as paraprofessionals, guidance counselor and administration. This team will investigate CASEL-approved SEL programs, visit schools using various programs, and select the program which meets the needs of PS 199. The SEL Team will go for training on the selected program and develop a plan to train the staff school wide. The selected program will be implemented. Using the instructional methods, materials, and curriculum of the selected program, teachers will incorporate SEL competencies into their teaching, including self-awareness, self-management, and relationship skills. This will create a learning environment which is supportive of students needs and which will propel their achievement. A workshop for parents will be conducted. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Teacher leaders, paraprofessional leaders and administrators October 2018 to January 2019 Principal Teacher leaders and administrators on the SEL Team January 2019 to February 2019 Principal and Guidance Counselor All staff March to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals and Guidance Counselor Parents and families March 2018 Guidance Counselor How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be invited to attend a workshop on the SEL program. The guidance counselor will also facilitate at least 2 other workshops to support families and students with recognizing and regulating emotions. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The SEL program and associated professional development will be purchased and teachers will be covered to attend professional learning. 7  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 50 percent of fifth grade students who scored between 2.0 and 3.5 on the State ELA test will have achieved the Benchmark reading level of T on the running record assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. TC Running Records Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Teacher collaboration is woven into the daily schedules and routines of PS 199. Classroom teachers are scheduled for a common preparation period with their grade colleagues a minimum of 4 periods per week. ENL teachers and special education teachers have one common prep per week with the grades they serve. Teachers also have opportunities to meet during the Tuesday Professional Activity Period. During these common planning periods, teachers plan curriculum and assessments, they norm and analyze student work, and reflect on next steps. Teachers learn together during the Professional Development period on Mondays and provide professional development for each other. Teachers turn key what they learn at District-wide PD and at Teachers College. The 2018 Framework for Great Schools Report gave PS 199 a score of 3.7 for Collaborative Teachers based on the School Environment Survey and we received a Well Developed rating for this indicator (3.4) on the Quality Review. However, on the School Environment Survey, only 59% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that overall, their professional development experiences in 2017-18 had included enough time to think carefully about, try, and evaluate new ideas. Teachers in grade teams will be given opportunities to work with staff developers from Generation Ready throughout the year to learn and implement best practices in teaching mathematics, as well as engage in a reflective cycle which facilitates instructional adjustments. The professional development will follow a model of learning new strategies and best practices, with follow up lab site coaching and feedback. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, effective teacher collaboration strategies and professional development on how to support each learner will lead to improved student achievement, as evidenced by 75% of Fourth Grade students that scored between a 2.5 and 3.5 on the 2018 State Math test (30 students) increasing by .5 proficiency on the 2019 math assessment (moving to a range of 3.0 to 4.0). 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). iReady will be implemented to provide students, including ELLs and SWDs, with targeted math instruction. Teachers will be trained on using the iReady platform and curriculum resources. Classroom and Special Education Teachers Nov. 2018 Principal with the Assistant Principals Using assessment data from the New York State Math assessments, iReady, EngageNY, and Exemplars, Fourth grade teachers will engage in data inquiry during common planning periods and work with our math staff developer from Generation Ready to identify instructional strategies that will benefit individual students, particularly ELLs and SWDs. The staff Developer from Generation Ready will coach teachers to implement targeted instructional strategies in their classrooms, reflect on their effectiveness, and adjust instruction. Specifically, teachers will receive professional development in using centers during mathematics instruction to deliver targeted small group instruction. Fourth Grade Classroom and Special Education Teachers  Oct. Principal, 2018 -- Item Analysis of State Math test  Nov. Assistant Principals and Staff Developer from Generation Ready 2018 to June 2019 -- Monthly analysis of Math data Sept. 2018 to June 2019 -- Teacher PD and coaching  During the Chancellor's Conference Day in November, teachers will be provided professional development on how to use Universal Design for Learning (UDL) principles when planning math centers so that the work is accessible to both ELLs and SWDs. Principal and Assistant Principals will provide teachers with feedback on the use of UDL in math centers in order to support learning for ELLs and SWDs during monthly walk-throughs and Advance observations. Classroom, ENL and Special Education Teachers Classroom, ENL and Special Education Teachers November 6, 2018 Principal, Assistant Principals and Staff Developer from Generation Ready November 2018 to June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principals 0  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will conduct workshops during the Tuesday Parent Engagement time in order to inform parents about the use of iReady and its availability for students to use at home and the new Engage NY curriculum. Math Exemplars and Engage NY homework will be sent home so that parents may have an understanding of rigorous math tasks and prerequisite skills. Parents will also be invited to attend at least one "math games Tuesday" at which parents will participate in a variety of math games requiring multi-step problem solving. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. iReady will be purchased for Grades 2 to 5. Generation Ready will be contracted to provide 13 PD and coaching days. Engage NY curriuculum, student materials, and PD resources will be purchased and utilized in addition to GoMath! The Monday PD time will be used to reflect and share best practices. Common planning time will be used to analyze student data, reflect on the efficacy of strategies and best practices that have been implemented, and plan adjustments to instruction. Assistant Principals will be leveraged to guide the professional learning and data inquiry. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, fourth grade students in the target population will have achieved the benchmark level of proficient on at least 3 domains of the February Exemplar. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Exemplar problems and rubrics Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The Framework for Great Schools Report 2018 included positive responses in the areas of inclusive leadership (96%), instructional leadership (80%) and setting high standards for student learning (91%). According to the 2015-16 Quality Review, “During the teacher team meetings several teachers stated that the principal sets clear expectations for teaching and learning through an explicit school-wide instructional focus on academic rigor. Using a monthly calendar and weekly staff meetings and professional development sessions, school leaders provide all staff with information and supports, identifying learning targets and expectations...Teachers reported that they are held accountable for delivering high quality instruction linked to complex texts, use of academic vocabulary, high level discussions, close reading, effective questioning and discussion, formative assessments and meaningful feedback to students.” At the same time, School Leadership focuses on building capacity in teacher leaders and teacher teams, providing opportunities for professional development outside of PS 199 and facilitating the turnkey of the professional development at PS 199. For example, teachers attended district-wide Professional Development on developing rigorous tasks led by LCI and math instruction led by Generation Ready. Teachers shared what they learned at Monday PD sessions and Chancellor Conference Days. Teacher practice on average is 97% Effective or Highly Effective as measured by Advance Observations at the end of June 2018. School Leadership will continue to lead by example by participating in teacher team meetings and professional development and building trust and capacity in teacher leaders and teacher teams, in order to maintain this high degree of performance and expectations, and increase student achievement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. As a result of Principal and Assistant Principal participation in common planning, professional development, and data inquiry, by June 2019, the number of students on each grade reading at levels 3 and 4 will increase 5 to 10% as measured by the TC Running Record Assessment, using October levels as the benchmark. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Grade meetings at which running record data will be analyzed will be scheduled into the school calendar and these meetings will be led by either the Principal or Assistant Principal in charge of the grade. Principal and Assistant Principals Oct. 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals The Principal and Assistant Principals will attend professional development led by Teachers College staff developers and lead this work with teacher leaders and others at PS 199. This professional development will focus on reading assessment, responsive teaching and writing about reading. Principal and Assistant Principals Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principals With our Instructional Team which includes representatives from each grade, the Principal and Assistant Principals will schedule at least 3 Learning Walks and classroom inter-visitations so that teachers can observe best practices in small group instruction in order to move students through the reading levels. Instructional Team, Principal and Assistant Principals Nov. 2018 to April 2019 Instructional Team, Principal and Assistant Principals, Literacy Coach Teachers will conduct low inference observations of students in Reading Workshop so as to collaboratively develop instructional strategies that will lead to higher student engagement and learning. Classroom Teachers Nov. 2018 to April 2019 Principal and Assistant Principals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Students will be provided with Storia accounts so that they may have access to e-books at home. Parents will be provided with log-in instructions and Storia general information. Storia competitions will be facilitated to encourage students to read and complete challenges regularly. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Teacher common planning periods ● Monday PD time 4  ● Tuesday Professional Activities time Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the number of students at each grade level reading at levels 3 and 4, as measured by the TC Running Record Assessments, will have increased between 3 and 6 percentage points from the September/October level. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. TC Running Records Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. PS 199 made significant progress in the area of strong family-community ties over the last several years. As a school, we placed increased emphasis on having translation services available for every major parent meeting. Teachers worked in teams during the Parent Engagement period to  Plan Parent Engagement Tuesday Workshops. Workshops delivered in 2017-18 were available to all parents, including parents of students with IEPs, students with autism, and English Language Learners. They included Writing celebrations, Music and the Brain workshops, ArtsConnection Theater workshops, Cultural celebrations, Math Games workshops, and a STEM workshop; and  Develop information and content for our eChalk school website on a monthly basis. In the 2018 school survey, our overall Family-Community Ties score increased to 3.42 (from 2.87). 96% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that they feel well-informed by the communications they receive from their child's school; 97% agreed or strongly agreed that their child's school communicates with them in a language and in a way that they can understand; and 92% agreed or strongly agreed that teachers work closely with them to meet their child's needs. 61% of parents/guardians responded that they have been asked or had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school (up from 54% in 2017). As a result, PS 199 will put additional emphasis on having parents volunteer and/or participate in school events. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will provide parents with at least five opportunities to volunteer for school activities and events, which will result in a 14% increase (from 61% to 75%) in parents who will agree or strongly agree that they have opportunities to volunteer time to support our school, measured by the results of the 2019 NYC School Survey. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will be provided with continued training on eChalk so that they may communicate with parents on how to support their children for success in school. Teachers Teachers will use the Tuesday Parent Engagement time to develop their class websites. Teachers Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Parent Involvement Teams consisting of teachers, the Principal and Assistant Principals Teachers and Parent Engagement Teams A letter inviting parents to provide information on whether they would like to volunteer, their availability, and interests and talents will be backpacked home in early October. More opportunities for parents to visit and participate in classroom activities will be provided. These will include: September Orientations, Writing celebrations, Math game Tuesday, Read Aloud Day, February Cultural Celebration, STEM workshops, Arts workshops and November Open School Week. In each instance, parents will be invited to volunteer their time. Letters sent home inviting parents to participate in school activities will be translated in all of the major languages spoken at P.S. 199. Translation will be provided during school events so that the parents of our ELL students will feel welcomed and included. Parents Oct. 2018 Principal working with PTA Parents Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals Parents Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Teacher Parent Engagement Teams 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. PS 199's partnership with NIA Community Services Network also supports family and community engagement through its after school program in our school. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 7   Tuesday Parent Engagement time will be utilized by teachers to work on these initiatives and conduct parent meetings and workshops. Subscriptions to eChalk will be purchased.  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, Parent Engagement Teams will have planned at least 5 events in which parents could participate and/or volunteer. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent Engagement Team Logs and Calendars. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During School Guided Reading Close Reading Shared Reading ------------------------------ Small group instruction One-to-one tutoring ------------------------------ ------------------------------ After School Interactive Writing Whole class Wilson Intervention System ------------------------------ Close Reading Shared Reading Interactive Writing Guided Practice UDL Scaffolds Number Talks Small group instruction During School After School One-to-one tutoring Whole class Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Multiple criteria includes:  Below median scale score between Level 2 and 3 on ELA state assessment  Below grade level benchmark on Running Record Multiple criteria includes:  Below median scale score between Level 2 and 3 onMath state assessment Less than 50% Average on Go Math and/or  Mathematics 9 Science Social Studies Engage NY Assessments Multiple criteria includes:  Below median scale score between Level 2 and 3 on Grade 4 Science state assessment Level 1 on Science Performance Task  Level 1 on Social Studies Standards rubric and Writing rubric At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Teacher Recommendation Close Reading Shared Reading Small group instruction During the School Day Repeated Readings Whole class After School Vocabulary Support Guided Review Close Reading Shared Reading Small group instruction Whole class Repeated Readings Vocabulary Support Guided Review Behavior Modification Systems Parent Communication Tools One-to-one counseling Small Group counseling Parent/Teacher meetings During the School Day Before School During School After School 0  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We have 1 student in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Services provided include purchasing clothing and school uniform, school supplies, and providing a metro card for transportation. Breakfast and lunch is also provided in school. The Guidance Counselor also checks in with the students to ensure that social and emotional needs are met. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 1  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Recruitment: PS 199 recruits new teachers in a variety of ways, including attending recruitment fairs, working with the New York City Teaching Fellows and Teach for America, using the New Teacher Finder website, and posting vacancies through Galaxy. We also contact the local universities including New York University, Columbia Teachers College, and Brooklyn College to make student teachers and others aware of opportunities. This provides us with a robust set of resumes from which to choose the most qualified candidates to interview. Candidates are interviewed and asked to present a demonstration lesson to a class or group of students. Through this process, offers are made only to the most highly qualified teachers. New Teacher Mentoring: New teachers are mentored by our school’s Literacy Coach and ESL Coordinator. The Literacy Coach meets with new teachers at least twice per week – modeling lessons, providing curriculum and lesson planning support, setting up intervisitations – providing individualized and personalized professional development. In addition, new teachers are supported by the teachers on their grade since all teachers participate in common planning time at least two periods per week. Retention and On-going Professional Development: PS 199 prides itself in being a Professional Learning Community. Our teachers participate in ongoing professional development provided by Teachers College and the Department of Education. Many of our teachers take leadership roles in turn-keying professional development and supporting their colleagues. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). As a Teachers College Reading and Writing School, the Principal, Assistant Principals, Literacy Coach, and teachers receive ongoing professional development on literacy instruction that meets standards The Principal and Assistant Principals attend conference days at Teachers College and/or participate in the on-site professional development offered at our school. The Literacy Coach attends 10 professional development days specific to strategies to effectively coach teachers. One teacher per grade attends lead teacher workshops and turnkeys the information to their grade during scheduled , grade specific professional planning periods. Each teacher will attend at least one workshop day at Teachers College and participate in at least 10 on site professional planning days. During these on site professional development days, the Teachers College staff developer models lessons, observes lessons, debriefs 3  and plans with teachers. On this day, administration, the literacy coach and teachers participate and have access to one-to-one coaching if needed. The ESL teachers attend a conference day facilitated by a senior staff developer. Teachers are asked to provide written feedback and information for each calendar day they attend and may turn key the information to staff during the 80 minute Monday PD period, faculty conferences, professional development days and planning periods as needed or requested. In addition, we host Teachers College Institutes at our school, allowing our teachers to have access to more professional development and model lessons. Teachers attend math professional development and coaching provided by Generation Ready. Professional development in math is also provided by the Principal, Assistant Principals, lead teachers, and District staff throughout the year. These sessions are used to develop curriculum by looking at standards aligned resources from Go Math, Engage NY, North Carolina, Georgia and other learning sites. These sessions are also used to develop questioning and discussion techniques, develop strategies to provide effective, actionable feedback to students, and create rigorous performance tasks. Paraprofessionals participate in professional development provided to teachers, as well as professional development tailored to their needs. Paraprofessionals also attend PD provided by the Horizon Program and NYU to understand how best to serve students with ASD and other special needs. Professional Development on the Danielson Framework is offered by our Principal, Assistant Principals and teacher leaders. Teachers are provided professional learning opportunities in all the domains. This professional development is in the form of videos, reading and discussing professional articles, looking at model lessons and lesson plans, modeling and debriefing, collaboration and looking at student work. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). In order to facilitate the transition from the early childhood program to Kindergarten, the Pre-K staff arranges visits to the Kindergarten classes. The children have an opportunity to observe a lesson and interact with the Kindergarten staff. For our parents, a workshop is offered by our Pre-K teachers This workshop helps parents better understand the 4  expectations of kindergarten and offers tips on what they can do with their child over the summer to help maintain routines that have been established throughout the year. Additionally, parents are invited to a parent night in May where the Kindergarten staff articulates information on curriculum, routines, life skills and summer suggestions in order to prepare for the transition to Kindergarten. Our Teachers College staff developer and literacy coach also assist in the Pre-K to Kindergarten transition by providing the Pre-K staff with PD that helps them have a better understanding of what their students' start of the year will look like in Kindergarten. For example, teachers learn how to utilize emergent story books to enhance their students' oral language skills. Professional development such as this helps to align the curriculum and ease the transition process into Kindergarten. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. A Measure Of Student Learning (MOSL) Committee will be created in September 2018. The Committee will meet at the start of the year to discuss the various assessment measures available. The team will review school data from the 2017-2018 academic year to inform their decision making. Once the decision is made by the team, they present the data and the decision to the school community during a professional development period. School staff continually participates in professional development provided by Teachers College, Generation Ready and other. Administration and teacher leaders systematically look at student work to inform instruction. Grade teams meet regularly to norm and look at student work and develop lessons and resources to improve student learning. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X X X Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5 Section 5 Section 5 Section 6 Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Federal Federal 340,575.00 44,420.00 Title III, Part A Federal 19,784.00 5 X X Section 5 Section 5 Title III, Immigrant Federal 0 Tax Levy (FSF) Local 2,991,864.00 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs. 6   Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 7  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. [PS 199] , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students PS 199 will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 8  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community. Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary School Act; 9  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● convening an Annual Title I meeting by October 30 to inform parents of Title I students about Title I requirements and the rights of parents to be involved in the Title I program;  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 199], in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 0  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 1  ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; 2  ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 3 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 3 9 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 5 11 12 4  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: This after school program will provide direct instruction to ENL students to prepare for the New York State ELA and Math assessments. The program will meet one day per week for 2 hours after school from January 9, 2019 to May 1, 2019. Because the goal is to prepare for the state exams, we are starting this program in January. There will be two classes on each of the 3rd, 4th and 5th grades with ENL students. There will be approximately 90 ENL students being served in this program. Title III funds will be used for two ENL teachers to provide direct instruction to these students. We've found that ENL students in particular need the additional support and practice in order to meet standards on the state assessments. At the same time, they require language scaffolding and strategies appropriate to their level of language acquisition. Two certified ENL teachers will work with 3rd, 4th and 5th grade teachers who are experienced in preparing students for these assessments in order to plan instruction that will meet the needs of the ENL students in the program. The ENL teachers will push-in and co-teach with the teachers in each class on a rotating basis. This model has proved successful in previous years as evidenced by the number of students that advanced in their level of ENL progression. For example, there were 24 ENL and former ENL third graders that attended the program. Of the 24, 16 of them took the NYSESLAT in the Spring of 2018. 7 of them went up one level in their ENL progression while 2 of them went up two levels and 7 of the students maintained their level. in fourth grade, there were 23 ENL and former ENL students in the program. Out of the 23, 11 current ENL students took the NYSESLAT. 6 ENL students moved up one level in their ENL progression, 1 student moved up two levels while 1 student moved up three levels. Additionally, there were 3 students that maintained their level. The materials that will be used in this program to support this work are test preparation materials supplemented with additional resources for language support. These materials are different from those being used for daily instruction. Title III funds will also be used to purchase NYSESLAT Test Preparation materials as well as iPads to be used to increase reading engagement with ENL students. Prior to the start of the program, letters will be sent to the parents advising them that their child is being invited to attend the after school program. Letters will be prepared in the parents' preferred language via the Translation and Interpretation Unit. Once the parent has accepted the invitation and the child is placed in the program, their attendance will be monitored each session the program meets. The teacher will take attendance at the start of each session and the attendance will then be submitted to the main office. Careful attention is given to the attendance records of each class to ensure that children are present for their weekly session. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration 5  Part C: Professional Development · · topics to be covered name of provider Scaffolds to help ELLs Meet the Rigors of the ELA Scaffolds to help ELLs Meet the Rigors of the Math Begin description here: Prior to the start of the program, our ENL-certified coordinator, Mrs. Nancy Zaugg, will provide professional development to the teachers in the program, providing all teachers with scaffolding and test taking strategies that will benefit the ELLs. The teachers in the program will also receive continued support from the ESL-certified teachers in the program. The Title III after school program team will meet on the first Monday of each month during the months of January, February March and April. During this Monday professional development time they will receive ongoing professional development to assist them in this program. They will meet for a total of four sessions with a duration of one hour for each session. This PD will positively impact the progress of our ENL students because they will be learning strategies to engage and accelerate the student's academic literacy. Agendas and attendance sheets will be maintained for each of these sessions. They will be kept in the professional development binder which is housed in the school's main office. The PD opportunities are of at no cost to the program. Additional Date and Topics of the Professional Development are as follows: · · Title III teachers as well as the ENL coordinator may also attend trainings offered by the Borough Field Support Center as available. Additionally, the Title III teachers and ENL coordinator attend staff development opportunities that are offered to us by Teachers College. The workshops they attend are specifically geared towards meeting the needs of ENL students. In these workshops, strategies are offered on how to differentiate instruction so that the language arts curriculum is more accessible to this population of students. This same team of teachers as well as the ENL coordinator also meets with our staff developers from Teachers College who provide us with professional development on meeting the needs of ELLs. The partnership with TC allows for ongoing professional development through the workshops they offer and the support of staff developers that come to our school. These staff developers work closely with our team and our students which helps us to target our needs accordingly. We also have a partnership with Generation Ready where a staff developer comes to work with our staff on building our math instruction. Through this professional development, students are enhancing their speaking skills by explaining how they solve their problems. Students are also improving their listening skills as they talk to one another about their work. The instruction in our Title III program is enhanced because of these professional development opportunities. The Title III teachers and ENL coordinator take what they've learned from these workshops and meetings and apply it to the teaching that is delivered in the Title III program. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities 6  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Begin description here: PS 199 has established a Parent Engagement Team for Parents of ENL students. This team is charged with developing events, activities and workshops which engage parents in supporting their children to achieve academically and socially at school. The first event which will be a reading workshop for the parents of ENL students is scheduled for November 13, 2018. The workshop will be provided by our ENL staff during the parent engagement time. It will be scheduled from 2:30-3:10. During this workshop parents will have the opportunity to learn about several reading strategies, leveled books and ways they could assess their children's comprehension while reading with them at home. The staff will also provide resources that the parents could use to foster a literacy environment at home. The team will also be planning a Writing Workshop celebration for parents which is to be held on January 22, 2019. The workshop will be held from 2:30-3:10 in each of our classrooms. The parents will see first hand the work the children do during their workshop time and the supports and scaffolds the ENL teachers put in place to help them get to their final piece. Another parental engagement event will be a celebration of our diverse culture. Our Cultural Celebration will be held February 12, 2019 from 2:30-3:10. This event gives the students and parents and opportunity to celebrate their cultures so that they feel welcomed and appreciated. Children will have the opportunity to dress in clothes from their native country and march around the school for everyone to see. They will also be able to share cultural artifacts which will be displayed as a gallery in our school cafeteria. The last workshop will be a workshop on how parents can help their children prepare for the NYSESLAT. It will be delivered by our ENL staff and it will be held on March 5, 2019 from 2:30-3:10. This workshop will provide parents with examples of what the children will be faced with when taking the NYSESLAT. We also will offer tips to parents in this workshop on how they can help advance their child's language progression. Parents will be notified of these events through an invitation which is backpacked home. The invitation is translated in the major languages spoken at PS 199 (Russian, Spanish, Urdu, Bengali, and Chinese) via the Translation and Interpretation unit. Interpretation services will be available during the workshops as needed. Agendas, attendance sheets and copies of the invitations will be kept in our Parent Engagement binder that is housed in our main office. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ 0 Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 7  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ 0 Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 8  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 21 School Name Frederick Wachtel Borough Brooklyn School Number 199 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Rosalia Bacarella Coach Nancy Zaugg ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Aimee Trombetta Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Sarah Proffit/ENL Teacher Related-Service Provider Chaya Twerski/Speech Superintendent Isabel DiMola Assistant Principal Gina Leahy Coach type here School Counselor Alison Spund Parent Saima Saqib Parent Coordinator Rita Velic Field Support Center Staff Member Marie Bastein Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 4 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 D. Student Demographics 9  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 497 Total number of ELLs 176 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 35.41% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 3 4 K Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Early literacy skills of ENLs are assessed through Teachers College TCRWP assessments. The assessment includes a concepts of print analysis, letter and sound recognition, spelling inventory, high frequency word recognition and leveled running records. The data informs our instruction and allows teachers to set goals for their ELLs. This assessment allows us to put our ELLs in guided reading groups and strategy groups accordingly. It also allows us to group our ELLs in terms of skills they may need, for example, letter/sound recognition groups, groups that need work on vowels or groups that need more work with sight word recognition. These groups are are just a few examples of how the assessment allows us to plan instruction for our ELLs Additionally, ENL teachers set goals to reflect the needs of their students based on listening, speaking, reading and 0  writing. These goals are based on the data collected from the NYSESLAT. The goals are monitored and assessed periodically. ENLs in the primary grades need additional support in all the modalities. This support is provided through the Fundations word study program and Reading and Writing workshops. ELLs in grades 3-5 who require literacy and decoding support receive additional instruction through the Wilson reading program. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? To support this effort, the classroom teacher meets with the ENL teacher that services the class and shares the data from the TCRWP assessment. Together they formulate groups so that the ENL teacher can support the work in these groups during the time she pushes into the class. Our TC staff developer also provides professional development to our teachers which enables both the ENL teacher and classroom teacher to gain insight on how the teachers can work with their ELL students. She provides suggestions and models instructional strategies and activities that can be used during small group work which support the deficiencies found from the assessment. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? TCRWP Assessments are used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the data has been gathered, teachers meet in grade and data inquiry teams to analyze the data and identify areas of need for each student. Instructional interventions are discussed, planned and implemented using the RTI framework discussed below. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] All of our children are given a baseline assessment which includes a Teachers College running record, a concepts of print assessment (in kindergarten), a high frequency word assessment and a spelling inventory. The data is then collected from these assessments, children are flagged and placed into groups within their class for Tier I intervention. The teacher keeps track of them over a 6 week period by progress monitoring them every 2 weeks. If the child does not make any progress, they are then referred to Tier II intervention. This is provided in a small group where progress is closely monitored every 2 weeks. In the event that the child does not make progress, he/she moves to Tier III for independent instruction. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Programs for ELLs are evaluated by looking at results from the NYSESLAT, state exams and our Teachers College assessments. The number of children gaining proficiency and those advancing levels not only on the NYSESLAT but the TC assessments are clear indicators of how successful our programs for ELLs are. On the 2016 NYSESLAT, we had 36% of our kindergarten students move to the commanding level, gaining proficiency in their first year of school. In our first grade, we had 47% of our students maintain their level of expanding. In second grade, we had 22% of our students move from the expanding level to the commanding level while 22% maintained their level of expanding. In third grade 43% maintained their level of expanding and 10% moved from expanding to commanding. In our fourth grade 22% of our students moved to the expanding level while 16% moved to commanding level. It is evident from these results that our ELL program is very successful. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Once our ENL coordinator, Nancy Zaugg, analyzes this data, it is disseminated to the ENL staff so that areas of need can be targeted accordingly. The ENL staff considers this data, along with the RLAT, to make adjustments in their teaching, focusing on areas that need improvement. Part IV: ELL Programming 1  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Specific scheduling will be based on the 2017 NYSESLAT. In general, all ELLs are included in classes with native English speakers and are heterogeneously grouped. Students that are Entering or Emerging are pulled out for stand-alone ENL instruction by a certified ENL teacher. The remaining integrated ENL units of instruction are provided by the certified ENL teacher in a push-in model. Students at the Transitioning, Expanding or Commanding levels are provided with push-in services integrated with ELA or other content area by a certified ENL teacher. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Certified ENL teachers are provided with a program that specifies the periods they are pulling out for stand alone ENL instruction and periods they are pushing in for integrated ENL instruction, along with student lists for each class. For our Entering and Emerging students In K-5, we provide 180 minutes of integrated ENL instruction in English Language Arts. For our Transitioning and Expanding students, we provide 180 minutes of integrated ENL instruction in ELA. For our Commanding students, we provide 90 minutes of integrated ELA instruction. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In order to maximize English language acquisition for ELLs, the ENL and the classroom teacher work closely to deliver literacy instruction, as well as tailor additional content instruction to meet the needs of our ELLs. To maximize language development, the teachers spend time planning together. These planning sessions enable the ENL teacher to meet the needs of her ELL students in a differentiated manner using ENL strategies. This makes the content more comprehensible for the students and helps them to meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Some of the instructional approaches utilized are small group instruction, co-teaching and parallel teaching. Within these instructional approaches, the ENL teacher delivers core content by modeling, having the children engage in shared reading, guided reading shared writing and interactive writing. Additionally, the ENL teacher will use the Fundations program, the TC reading and writing units of study and Words Their Way to make content comprehensible. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? To ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their native language, P.S. 199 does two things. One thing we do is test children in Spanish that qualify for Spanish testing when taking the NYSITELL. Another procedure we have in place involves the assistance of our testing coordinator. She articulates with classroom and ENL teachers to provide the state assessments in ELA, Math and Science in native languages for students who would benefit from translated exams. If a child needs to have a test translated in a language other than available translations, we secure translators for these children through a DOE contracted vendor. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? a. SIFE 2  b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. We currently do not have any SIFE students, but in the event we did they would receive academic intervention in the form of small group instruction. They would also be invited to attend our after-school academic program which would be targeted to their specific learning needs. b. The majority of newcomers are students in our early childhood grades. The curriculum in these early grades is focused on literacy skills such as phonics, decoding, comprehension and writing. P.S. 199 utilizes Fundations and the Teachers College Reading and Writing workshop model for literacy instruction. ENL teachers also utilize and support this curriculum and scaffold learning using best practices for ENL instruction. For the newcomers in grades 3 to 5, literacy instruction is delivered using Wilson, a phonics-based reading and writing program. This instruction is in addition to ESL services and literacy instruction in the classroom. ENL and classroom teachers support learning in the content areas by using best practices such as front-loading vocabulary, using pictures to support content in their instruction and sentence frames to promote language development. c. For our developing ELLs, they continue to receive their mandated services as well as any necessary accommodations. Wilson intervention services are provided to those students who have been identified as struggling with decoding, fluency and basic reading comprehension. d. As a Pre-K to 5 school, PS 199 has no long terms ELLs. e. For former ELLs, 90 minutes of push-in services will be provided and testing accommodations will be given to former ELLs accordingly. These students will also be invited to attend our after-school academic program. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? To foster academic gains for our ELL-SWDs we provide professional development to our special education teachers to improve strategies they use in order to meet the needs of their students. They attend workshops given by Teachers College as well as the Department of English Language Learners. These workshops help the teachers provide the academic content that is necessary but with a differentiated approach so that the needs of their learners are met. They provide such strategies as front loading vocabulary, using sentence frames to accelerate language development, close reading to better comprehend text and picture support to help understand content. Such techniques help to add to the children's vocabulary development and the understanding of new words and content in all subject areas. The ENL teachers also make sure to find leveled books that are also grade appropriate. If there are newcomers in the upper grades, the chosen leveled books are more age appropriate while still at their current reading level. Regarding materials, there are a variety of materials teachers use to provide access to the content and accelerate their English development. For one ENL student with hearing issues, we have a microphone to pass around during student-to-student and student-to-teacher discussions so he can hear his classmates and participate. In addition, the grade level Fundations materials have been adapted so that each lesson has an accompanying PowerPoint that features visuals of the words studied. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? At P.S. 199, schedules are arranged so that mandated services and ENL services don't conflict. This type of scheduling allows for service providers to work on IEP goals and for ENL services to be delivered accordingly. ELL-SWD students are placed in ICT classes and are provided services depending on their ELL level. Students who are both ICT and ELL are placed in heterogeneous groups which the ENL teacher and the Special Education teacher co-teach so that students are able to receive both of their mandated services. When ELL-SWDs need to be pulled out for their ENL services, it is done so during their non-mandated Special Education periods. Having this plan in place allows for ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain their English proficiency within the least restrictive environment. 3  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted interventions in ELA and Math include small group instruction, one-to-one tutoring and conferencing. These interventions are provided in all of our grades by the classroom teacher as well as the ENL teacher. Fundations Intervention is also provided in grades 1, 2 and 3 by our Wilson Intervention Specialist to meet the needs of those emerging, transitioning and expanding ELLS who are struggling with phonetic skills based on Fundations assessments. The intervention is provided via a push-in model 4 times a week in a first grade and second grade class and five times a week in third grade class. These services are provided in English as these students are in our ESL program. The program for the 2017-2018 school year is yet to be determined but it is our plan to continue this intervention using our Wilson Intervention Specialist. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? During the 2016-2017 school year, our school became involved with the implementation of the Storia program. This on-line library allows children to interact with a multitude of books in numerous genres. Each child has a profile which tracks the amount of time they are reading as well as their comprehension. We found this program to be very successful as the children were motivated to complete challenges that held them accountable for their reading. The system lets the child know the errors they've made and helps them to understand where their comprehension may have broken down. Because of the success of this program, it is our intention to use it again in the upcoming school year. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? P.S. 199 does not have a bilingual program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs participate in the full curriculum at P.S. 199. This includes Literacy, Math, Social Studies, Science, Technology, Music, Art and Physical Education. ELLs engage in small group instruction with their ESL service providers in order to have full access to the curriculum. A Title III after school literacy program will also be offered to ELLs in our 3 rd , 4 th and 5 th grades. ELLs are included in all of Arts and Enrichment programs, both during and after school. For example, ELLs participated in a theater residency provided by Arts Connection to our second grade classes. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Technology is used to support ELLs through the use of iPads in the classroom. These iPads give students the opportunity to improve their literacy skills with the use of interactive apps. In addition to iPads, computers, ENO boards, document cameras and Smart Boards are available in many of our classrooms to enhance the teaching and learning for all students, including our ELL population. We have also incorporated the Storia program in all of our classes which allows children to read independently on an iPad. In this literacy/technology program, children have their reading monitored through comprehension questions that are both multiple choice and short response. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? One way PS 199 supports the native languages of our ELL students in our ENL program is by providing literature in their native language both in the classroom libraries and the school library. Parents are welcome to visit the school library to borrow books in their native language and in English to support student growth. We have also established a partnership with parents so that they can apply for a public library card. This will also help them gain access to materials in their native language through the Brooklyn Public Library. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Required services support and correspond to the age and grade levels of ELLs. Teachers use the Common Core Standards and ESL standards to drive their instruction. 4  15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). To assist newly enrolled ELL students before the beginning of the school year, parents of ELLs are given a parent handbook. The handbook is available in English, Spanish, Russian, Chinese, Bengali and Urdu. The handbook provides parents/guardians with the information they need to assist their child with a smooth transition. Additionally, at the time of enrollment translators are called upon to assist the parents if translation services are needed. The staff involved in these translation services are our paraprofessionals, Anna Dopyera and Jacqueline Lopez. The paraprofessionals also take the time to talk to the newly enrolled student in their native language. This helps to ease their anxiety and begins to build a sense of community. This procedure is maintained throughout the school year. At the very start of the school year, parents are also invited to attend a parent orientation to meet their child's teacher. At this meeting, teachers give clear expectations for the upcoming school year and parents have the opportunity to ask questions. Translations are provided by our paraprofessionals and we also hire additional translators from Big Word to assist parents during these meetings. Our Parent Coordinator, Rita Velic and Guidance Counselor, Alison Spund are present at these meetings to welcome our parents/guardians to our school. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We currently do not offer any language electives to ELLs. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Teachers of ELLs, including the general education teachers, subject area teachers, ENL and special education teachers share common planning periods to facilitate professional development. The planning periods allow time for the development of mini-lessons and an opportunity to look at student work so that decisions can be made on which instructional strategies would work best. During this time, our teachers also receive professional development from a Teachers College staff developer. She visits us 10 times a year and supports our teachers by planning with them and modeling mini-lessons. The guidance she provides benefits all of our personnel. During the common planning periods, our ENL Coordinator/Literacy Coach supports ELL personnel by providing strategies that will also support their instruction. In addition to the professional development opportunities offered at our school, our ENL teachers participate in professional development offered by the Department of ELLs, the Borough Field Support Center, and District. Their workshop notes are shared amongst the staff and at times they are given the opportunity to turn key what they've learned at professional development meetings. This year a group of staff members attended ENL/QTEL training conducted by Generation Ready. The teachers involved in this training had large groups of ELLs in their classes. This training allowed them to support the ELLs in 5  their class as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards. Other staff members conducted inter-visitations with the teachers involved in this training to gain insight on the strategies that they were learning, Participating teachers also provided professional development on QTEL strategies to the whole staff on two occasions. Our school also hosted a QTEL meeting which allowed our other ENL staff, our ENL coordinator and principal to attend. This was a hands-on experience that benefited all of us as we are a community of teachers that want to learn strategies that will continue to help our ELL population to make growth. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our school's 2017-18 Professional Development Plan for the year includes a 4-week cycle dedicated to best practices in rigorous ELL instruction. All teachers, including ENL teachers, will participate in this professional development. In addition ENL teachers attend ELL-specific professional development provided by Teachers College and the Department of Education. Our ENL coordinator and Literacy Coach, Nancy Zaugg, also provides ELL-specific professional development during a weekly common planning period shared by all of our ENL teachers. Mrs. Zaugg maintains records of these professional development activities in the form of agendas and attendance sign-in sheets. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In order to provide annual individual meetings, P.S. 199 will be sending letters home to parents in both English and the parents preferred language of communication. The letter will indicate an appointment time for the parent/guardian to meet the ENL teacher during the Tuesday parent engagement time. The letters will be translated via the Translation and Interpretation Unit to ensure that the parent/guardian understands the importance of this meeting. The letter will also ask the parent/guardian if they require a translator at their meeting. If the parent indicates such, we will provide a translator via one of our staff members or call the Translation and Interpretation unit hot line. These meetings will involve setting goals, reviewing student work and language proficiency assessments as well as their language development needs in all content areas. At the time of the annual meeting, the ENL teacher will have the parent sign in on an attendance sheet so that there is a physical record of those parents who have attended the annual individual meeting. A copy of the attendance sheet will be kept by the ENL teacher and the ENL coordinator. To ensure that parent needs are accommodated, our staff will also give the option of a meeting by phone in the event the parent cannot attend the designated time given to them. This option will be described in the letter sent home as mentioned in question 1 of this section. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. In order to foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs, PS 199 holds several parent engagement evenings. We host our P.S.199 Art Show where parents are invited to come to the school and walk the hallways to see all the art work the children have created. The children have an opportunity to describe the exhibits to their parents as they are very proud to showcase their work. We also host a school play and all parents are invited to attend. This event builds a sense of community as it brings all of our students together. The students, many of whom are ELLs or former ELLs are proud to be part of this performance and the parents and classmates are just as proud to watch them. This year we also sponsored two Saturday trips to the Museum of Math. This trip involved parents and students both in our lower and upper grades. The trip allowed the children and their parents to explore hands-on exhibits in math as well as attend a math workshop at the end of their day at the museum. 6  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 7 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Rosalia Bacarella, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 8  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 199 School DBN: 21K199 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Rosalia Bacarella Gina Leahy Rita Velic Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Aimee Trombetta ENL/Bilingual Teacher Saima Saqib Parent Nadia Ciaccia/Special Ed Teacher/Subject Area Sarah Proffit Nancy Zaugg Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Alison Spund School Counselor Isabel DiMola -- -- -- -- Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 9 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: PS 199 Superintendent: Isabel DiMola DBN: 21K199 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Literacy Coach & ENL Coordinator no yes Nancy Zaugg * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The ESL Coordinator keeps a record of languages spoken at home for each child based on the Home Language Survey. This informs us of the languages we need to make available to our parents. The information is also entered and maintained in ATS and available for reports to be printed out as needed. In addition, the Blue Emergency Contact Card asks parents to indicate their preferred language. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 0  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral ALBANIAN ARABIC BENGALI (BANGLA IN BANGLADESH) BURMESE CHINESE ANY CANTONESE GEORGIAN ENGLISH POLISH PORTUGUESE ROMANIAN RUSSIAN SPANISH TURKISH TADZHIK (AKA TAJIK) URDU UKRAINIAN UZBEK 4 3 6 1 6 0 5 318 1 1 1 144 92 1 4 15 4 27 0.63 0.47 0.95 0.16 0.95 0 0.79 50.24 0.16 0.16 0.16 22.75 14.53 0.16 0.63 2.37 0.63 4.27 3 3 5 1 6 1 5 313 1 0 1 144 91 1 5 18 5 30 0.47 0.47 0.79 0.16 0.95 0.16 0.79 49.45 0.16 0 0.16 22.75 14.38 0.16 0.79 2.84 0.79 4.74 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Uzbek Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families How do you plan to translate? September: Parent Handbook September/Distributed to families once per year Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The parent handbook and the forms which were mentioned in the first column were sent to the Translation and Interpretation unit during the summer. The handbook is 1  Forms: Emergency Contact Information, How will your child go home?, Picture Permission, School Calendar Meet the Teacher Night September November: Grading Policy November Parent Teacher Conferences January: Promotion in Doubt Letter and January After School Program Information March: Parent Teacher Conferences April: Testing Letter and Calendar March disseminated during the first week of school. This form is translated by the Translation and Interpretation Unit. It will be sent out on September 12. Translators from Big Word have been secured so that parents who are in need of support will have a translator available to them during their conference with the teacher. These forms are translated by the Translation and Interpretation Unit. The parent teacher conference form is disseminated on November 5. Parents are asked to specify if they need a translator for their appointment. Translators from Big Word are hired accordingly so that there is someone available to translate for the parent at the time of the conference. The grading policy is given to the child along with the report card. It will be given out on November 15. These forms will be translated by the Translation and Interpretation Unit These forms will be translated by the Translation and Interpretation Unit end of March This form will be translated by the Translation and Interpretation Unit May: Parent Teacher Night June: Graduation Invitations and Moving Up Invitations May This form will be translated by the Translation and Interpretation Unit 2  June These invitations will be translated by the Translation and Interpretation Unit 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Family Nights: September 17, May 17 September and May Parent Teacher Conferences: November 3 and March 9 November and March Informal Parent Meetings are held throughout the year on Tuesdays, 2:30 to 3:10 and by appointment The Guidance Counselor meets with 5 th grade parents during the Middle School articulation process in November Teachers meet with parents of students with disabilities for Annual Reviews and IEP meetings interpretation service(s)? Interpreters are hired from the BIG WORD and in house interpreters are also used for these family nights. The interpreters represent all the languages that are represented in our school. When a parent is in need of an interpreter, the teacher will call the main office and an interpreter will be sent to the classroom to provide their services. Interpreters are hired from the BIG WORD and in house interpreters are also used for parent teacher conferences. Schedules are made for each interpreter prior to each of these conferences. The schedules allow them to know what class they need to report to to provide their translation services. For these meetings, teachers make arrangements with our in house interpreters so that they can be present to provide their assistance. If an in house staff member is not available, the teacher then calls the language line for services. In house interpreters are present at this meeting and provide their services to parents as needed. For these meetings, teachers make arrangements with our in house interpreters so that they can be present to provide their assistance. If an in house staff member is not available, the IEP teacher then calls the language line for services. 3  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency where it is necessary to communicate with a parent that does not speak English, we have one of our in house interpreters reach the family. Because their language of preferred communication is stipulated on the blue card, we will use this information to help us decide whether we can use someone within our building or of we have to call the hot line for their services. A two way call will be placed so that the interpreter form the hot line can notify the parent accordingly. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. At the start of the school year all teachers are given a flyer with the phone number of the hot line so that they can utilize it for one-to-one meetings if necessary. The phone number is also posted by the phone in the main office that the teachers utilize to make phone calls to parents. Teachers are also informed by our Language Access Coordinator that they can send notices to the Translation and Interpretation Unit to inform parents in their home language of class events or workshops that are being offered. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) At the main entrance of the school, welcome signs along with notices on the right to request translation and interpretation services are displayed in all of the languages covered under Chancellor' Regulation A-663. The school Safety Agent desk has language cards so parents can identify the language they speak. The Parents' Bill of Rights is displayed on the PTA Bulletin Board and made available to parents in their preferred language by the Parent Coordinator, in addition to other resources such as the Parents' Guide to Language Access. Parents are informed of the translation services that are available to them at PTA, parent/teacher, Leadership and Title I meetings and through written notices. Translated letters are backpacked home before every formal meeting informing parents of the availability of translation and interpretation services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 4  Our Parent Coordinator is in regular contact with parents, ensuring that parents are receiving the translation services that they need. Feedback from parents is also gathered through PTA meetings, School Leadership Team meetings, and through the annual school environment survey. 5 
