 20K205 School Name: P.S. 205 CLARION Principal: FEIGA MANDEL   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Clarion School 332000010205 PreK-5 6701 20 th Avenue 718 236-2380 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 20K205 718 331-7299 Fax: FeigaMandel Fmandel3@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: FeigaMandel Kathleen Nicholas Cindy Cavallaro FeigaMandel Cindy Cavalaro Cindy Chen District Information Geographical District: 20 Superintendent’s Office Address: Karina Costantino Superintendent: 415 89 Street, Brooklyn, NY 11209 KCostan@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 759-4912 Phone Number: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) MauricieredeGovia FSC: Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 415 89 Street Brooklyn, NY 11209 MDegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 240-3677 Phone Number: Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) FeigaMandel Kathleen Nicholas Cindy Cavallaro Sofia Asaro Raeann Harney Mary Ellen Ambrosio *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable UFT UFT UFT   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Mary Ann Ortiz Nicole Rego Mollica FabianaSantana Arlene Alegre Parent Parent Parent Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? .P.S. 205 is a community of learners who work hard to excel. We are a multicultural community based school serving children in the mainstream and Special Education. We are committed to the development of the whole child by providing high quality standards driven instruction through the cooperative efforts of and informed caring administration, a dedicated well-prepared staff, involved concerned parents and a supportive community. Our combined efforts will enable us to develop and nurture programs to meet the academic, social, emotional, and physical needs of our students so that they become skilled, productive citizens who respect themselves and others.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 205 is a barrier free elementary school located in the Bensonhurst section of Brooklyn, New York. This pre-kindergarten to fifth grade school services a population of approximately 1246 students in both general and special education classes. P.S. 205 houses 58 classes, including 14 of the 58 classes being self-contained special education classes, 2 ICT classes and 10 classes servicing gifted and talented students. Our special education classes consist of students who are in an inclusion setting, 12:1 and 12:1:1 settings inclusive of Bilingual Yiddish children and children who participate in New York State Alternate Assessment (NYSAA). Our gifted and talented program consists of one kindergarten class, one first grade classes, two second grade classes, two third grade classes and two fourth grade classes and two fifth grade class. 30% of the P.S. 205 population are English Language Learners who are serviced by seven English as a New Language (ENL) teachers.. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. P.S. 205 houses the following general education classes (not including the gifted and talented classes): 3 full day pre-kindergarten classes,8 kindergarten classes including 1 Bi-lingual Chinese class and one ICT class, 7 first grade classes including 1 Bi-lingual Chinese class, 5 second grade classes, 5 third grade classes, 4 fourth grade classes and 4 fifth grade classes. The average class size in kindergarten is 25, first grade is 23, second grade is 30, third grade is 29, fourth grade is 31 and fifth grade is 30. P.S. 205 has two Special Education Teacher Services Support (SETSS) teachers who service students using both a push-in and pull-out model. P.S. 205 supports both the general education and special education students with services to meet their needs. Three full time and 2 F status Academic Intervention Service (AIS) providers provide additional support to students who are struggling in Math and Literacy. Special education students receive their mandated related services of speech, occupational therapy, physical therapy and adaptive physical education during the school day. A full time instructional coach works with teachers to improve instruction and deepen knowledge. We have 20 teachers who departmentalize with 20 classes in grades 2-5. One teacher fosters instruction in literacy, while the other fosters instruction in math and the content areas. P.S. 205 incorporates the use of the workshop model for instruction in all subject areas. As a school we designed our own curriculum maps for English Language Arts (ELA) based on the New York State Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS). P.S. 205 utilizes Math in Focus for math instruction. Content based instruction is based on the Scope and Sequence. Each grade incorporates two units of content into literacy throughout the year. At least one of these units per grade is taught through the Independent Investigation Model (IIM) approach to research. P.S. 205 has a classroom Coffee Shop run by a class of 12:1:1 students combining academics with Activities for Daily Living (ADL) skills. Our ENL teachers service the ENLs through the use of the integrated model. The classroom and ENL teacher collaborate to meet the needs of the ENL students and to plan for instruction. Every teacher including special education teachers have at least five common preparation periods per week. This time is utilized by grade members to plan and look at student work. P.S. 205 firmly believes that assessment drives instruction. Teachers constantly assess both formally and informally using the DRA2, running records, conferencing and built in math unit assessments and benchmarks. Data is then analyzed to inform best instructional practices. We have two technology cluster teachers who use rolling laptops and iPads to give all students technology instruction. Additionally, every classroom is equipped with a Smart Board and ELMO. Every grade shares a rolling laptop cart and IPAD cart for student’s use. Nine classrooms have Smart Tables. 0  P.S. 205 supports the Arts with two full time art teachers, three full time music teachers. We have a chorus, orchestra, band and a recorder ensemble. The students participate in Music Memory and Dancing Classrooms. Marquis Studio provides 10 week residency programs that integrate dance, technology, science and the arts. The gifted and talented students are learning how to play the recorder, bells and keyboard, and grades 3-5 will receive coding instruction using NAO Robots. All students have The Tynker Program for coding and the K-2 G&T classes have Dash and Dot for Coding activities. Special education students who receive Adaptive Physical Education (APE) participate in a basketball tournament and Dance festival. Additional clusters include library, technology, and geography. P.S. 205 has three full time gym teachers allowing every child to participate in physical education, besides Art and Music. Parent newsletters are sent home monthly in all languages. There are school wide, grade level and cluster teacher newsletters. Every classroom and cluster teacher has a website which gets updated weekly. Parent workshops are provided bimonthly on various topics connecting the home-school environment. Teachers are kept informed with the weekly Clarion News and via the members of the Collaborative Instructional Learning Team which meets bi-monthly. P.S. 205 has a school wide Book of the Month program in which each class creates responses in writing following the read aloud of the text. The book is sent home with a different child during that month in order to foster a home school connection. Professional Development is provided by the full time coach as well as grade level representatives from the Collaborative Learning Team as well as teachers who attend offsite workshops. There are also cross grade team meetings. Teachers participate in inter- visitations in order to learn and share Best Practices. We support higher standards with our afterschool Title III program, ELA and Math Academy, science program and enrichment clubs. Our school community goes beyond the school doors. It is made up of many friends in Bensonhurst and beyond. The Brooklyn Chinese Association provides an additional afterschool program for our students. P.S. 205 has developed partnerships in the community and enjoys collaboration with many organizations from the cultural and educational sector. Some of these resources include: Environmental Study Center, College of Staten Island, Brooklyn College, American Heart Association and NIA Food Drive 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Based on the Framework for Great Schools component of rigorous instruction, implementation of Domain 3 of Danielson’s Framework for Teaching which includes using questioning and discussion techniques, engaging students in learning and using assessment in instruction is on average rated as effective. Our goal is to have more teaches rate highly effective in this domain. As a school, we are focusing on improving in these areas through implementation of higher order thinking questions and student led discussions as well as the implementation of success criteria implementation through feedback cycles. In addition, we will continue our Inquiry work around supporting ENL’s and SWD’s through the use of Advanced Literacy and other vocabulary resources. As a school we piloted Growth Mindset to address the social and emotional needs of our student population. Our goal is to deepen this work by ensuring that every classroom establishes a culture of Growth Mindset. School wide we have made the most progress in the element of Collaborative Teachers in that teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms by participating in professional development activities. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 20K205 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1278 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 140 138 55 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 54 52 55 7 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 67.0% % Attendance Rate 64.7% % Reduced Lunch 26.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.2% 19.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 19.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0.25 0% 14% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 62.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 84% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES NO NO YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 2 2 95.9% 1.8% 15.6% 1.0% 59.2% 0.2% 6 1% 7.9 66.1% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As per the 2017-2018 Quality Review the school's strengths relative to rigorous instruction include, across classrooms, teachers use and create assessments and rubrics that are aligned to the school’s curricula and national standards. Consistent in-the-moment classroom assessment practices reflect checks for understanding and self-assessment. Actionable feedback and effective in-the-moment classroom adjustments ensure students’ learning needs are met in order to increase their academic achievement. School leaders and faculty are utilizing curricula aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards and content standards which integrate vocabulary, close reading, and argumentative writing. Teachers use formative and summative data in ELA and math to plan units and refine instructional tasks. Consistent analysis of student work and data leads to tasks that provide access for and cognitively engage diverse learners in the curricula, build coherence, and promote post-secondary readiness. Teaching strategies have yet to strategically provide multiple entry points and high-quality supports and extensions aligned to project-based learning approaches as reflected in student work, small group instruction, and discussions. Although students are fully engaged, student work and discussions have yet to reflect higher-order thinking and ownership in some classes. Through implementation of the Danielson Framework for Teaching, Domain 3 from Advance our teachers are on average rated as effective (67%) with 28% achieving a highly effective rating. This domain includes using questioning and discussion techniques, engaging students in learning and using assessment in instruction. Our goal is to have more teachers rate highly effective in this domain. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound.  By June 2019, all teachers will use high level questioning techniques, use of the language progressions for ENL students and will incorporate rigorous vocabulary instruction. Teachers will integrate assessment into instruction using an inquiry based approach. This is done through extensive use of formative assessment to improve rigorous instruction. This will result in a 2% increase of teachers scoring highly effective in Domain 3 of Advance as measured by formal and informal teacher observations. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Use of DOK and Hess’s Cognitive Matrix when planning All Teachers 9/18-6/19 10/18-5/19 9/18-6/19 9/18-6/19 9/18-6/19 10/19-6/19 9/18-6/19 9/18-6/19 10/18-5/19 Sept. 2018 through June 2019  and implementing lessons Implementation of success Criteria Professional Development as a method of formative assessment  Use of the Workshop Model for instruction, incorporating questioning and discussion techniques Increased use of Literature Circles amongst all classes   Common Planning Time• Intervisitation to colleagues highlighting Best Practices  Weekly Professional Development sessions focusing on  deepening the use of Success Criteria as a vehicle for feedback cycles Intervisitations to colleagues using Project-Based Learning Inquiry work that includes the use of Advanced Literacy   Ongoing Professional Development with Core Collaborative SETSS push in/pull out  UDL implementation in all lessons  Use of Language Stems  Protocols for discussions   ESL push in  Reading and Math AIS push in Speech and Language Therapy   Visual Mapping of Vocabulary Classroom teachers of ENLs, Teachers of 12:1, 12:1:1, SETSS, ENL teachers, AIS providers Administration, All Teachers (Classroom& Cluster), ENL, SETSS, Literacy Coach Administration, All Teachers- Classroom, Cluster, ENL, SETSS, AIS, Speech teachers 4  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In order to engage families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and the CCLS in order to support their children at home. P.S. 205 will host parent curriculum conferences in September. These conferences will give parents the opportunity to meet their child's classroom teacher and to learn about the curriculum that will be standard throughout the year. Parents will learn about their child's class website, cluster, websites and school website. Teachers will follow up with monthly class newsletters as well as the school newsletter. In November parents will once again meet the teachers for Parent Teacher Conferences in which they discuss their child's academic progress. Throughout the year teachers will send home written academic goals for the students. Parents attend classroom publishing parties on an ongoing basis where children share their accomplishments in writing based on the CCLS. Additionally, ongoing monthly parent workshops will incorporate topics related to homework and helping your child at home, Literacy and Math. Key personnel responsible for implementation and overseeing these elements include the Principal, Assistant Principals and the Parent Coordinator. Translation services will be available to support families of ENL students for all parent workshops and Parent Teacher Conferences. All monthly newsletters as well as most forms of communication related to instruction is sent home in the family's native language. Our parent coordinator who speaks Chinese is an ongoing support to our Chinese speaking families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Classroom teachers, AIS push in, ENL push in , SETSS push in/pull out, inter-visitations, common planning time, Professional Development, Instructional Leads, IIM, Library Books, Textbooks Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 2% increase of teachers scoring highly effective in Domain 3 of Danielson’s Framework for Teaching as measured by formal and informal observations as evidenced on the Advance MOTP Report and Advance Dashboard. At same percentage as last year at this time. Will continue to monitor for a 2% increase by providing feedback to teachers to move towards highly effective. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) As measured by the overall score of MOTP in Advance as measured by formal and informal observations. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? As per the 2017-2018 Quality Review, The school community strategically develops structures and aligns professional development, family outreach and student learning experiences and supports that are connected to students developing a growth mindset and persevering through challenging tasks. Personalized student supports, attendance initiatives, and coordination of programs result in the adoption of effective academic and personal behaviors. School leaders and staff communicate high expectations using multiple ongoing support structures to provide parents with feedback about their children’s progress and they establish a learning culture for students based upon research-based practices that is aligned to the standards. Parents are aware of and understand their children’s progress towards schoolwide expectations. Students are provided with ongoing feedback and support to prepare for their next level of learning. Through implementation of the Danielson Framework for Teaching, Domain 2 from Advance our teachers are on average rated as highly effective (55%) with 43% achieving an effective rating. This domain includes creating an environment of respect and rapport and managing student behavior . Our goal is to have more teachers rate highly effective in this domain. Structures and practices that are in place include the continued implementation of Growth Mindset using the Book of the Month selections revolving around the theme of Growth Mindset as well as Mindfulness and the implementation of a Respect for all Club. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will create an environment where all students feel valued and are comfortable taking intellectual risks through a culture of Growth Mindset and clear behavioral expectations in which student behavior is entirely appropriate with students taking an active role in monitoring their own behavior and/or that of other students against standards of conduct to improve a supportive environment that will result in a 2% increase of teachers scoring highly effective in Domain 2 of Danielson’s Framework for Teaching as measured by formal and informal observations. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Respect for All Training with guidance counselor  Discipline Code Assemblies in All Staff and Students September  Bullying Assemblies/Posters- join contest creating essays and posters  Health and Nutrition Lessons via the PE teachers  Growth Mindset as a Social Emotional Curriculum  Books of the Month aligned to Growth Mindset  Behavioral Success Criteria  RTI team meets monthly to implement special education strategies and materials in the general education classroom.  The School Implementation Team created an IEP Action Plan that ensures that all students have access to rigorous curriculum with appropriate supports and services as well as creating quality IEP’s.  ENL Integrated model allows for ENL students to be serviced within their classrooms during the literacy block. This model allows for differentiation for ENL students within the subjects of reading and writing. Level 1 and 2 students, Students with Disabilities, ENLs, Special Education Teachers Monthly throughout the year N/A Administration, All Classroom Teachers, Clusters, ENL, SETSS, Self-Contained The second week of each month Administration, Classroom teachers, AIS providers, ENL teachers, SETSS teachers, Speech Teachers, Guidance Counselor, Social Worker, School Psychologist N/A 7   SETSS Push-in/Pull-out model supports instruction for identified students within their classroom settings in order to ensure that students do not miss classroom instruction. Additionally, the push-in model allows for collaboration between the classroom teacher and the SETSS provider as well as the ability to service at-risk students within the class of service.  Academic Intervention Services-  Math and ELA Speech and Language TherapyGuidanceProfessional Development on writing IEP goals based on students PLOP  Periodic data analysis  Cycles of observations with feedback that is cyclical 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. In order to engage families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment the Book of the Month revolving around Growth Mindset will be sent home to a different family each night to be shared with the family and to draw a picture in an assigned notebook that is shared amongst each class. This practice will take place monthly 8  throughout the school year. Additionally, our guidance counselor will conduct parent workshops revolving around supporting children with homework, middle school process, crisis intervention. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Assemblies, ENL Teachers, AIS providers, Speech and Language Therapists, Guidance Counselor, MOSL, ELL Academy, Science/Social Studies/ Prep, Award Reading Software, I Ready Software Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 2% increase of teachers scoring highly effective in Domain 3 of Danielson’s Framework for Teaching as measured by formal and informal observations as evidenced on the Advance MOTP Report and Advance Dashboard. At same percentage as last year at this time. Will continue to monitor for a 2% increase by providing feedback to teachers to move towards highly effective. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. As measured by the overall Advance MOTP score is measured by formal and informal observations. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As per the 2017-2018 Quality Review, The school community strategically develops structures and aligns professional development, family outreach and student learning experiences and supports that are connected to students developing a growth mindset and persevering through challenging tasks. Personalized student supports, attendance initiatives, and coordination of programs result in the adoption of effective academic and personal behaviors. School leaders and staff communicate high expectations using multiple ongoing support structures to provide parents with feedback about their children’s progress and they establish a learning culture for students based upon research-based practices that is aligned to the standards. Parents are aware of and understand their children’s progress towards schoolwide expectations. Students are provided with ongoing feedback and support to prepare for their next level of learning. Through implementation of the Danielson Framework for Teaching, Domain 2 from Advance our teachers are on average rated as highly effective (55%) with 43% achieving an effective rating. This domain includes creating an environment of respect and rapport and managing student behavior . Our goal is to have more teachers rate highly effective in this domain. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 all teachers will participate as part of a data inquiry team in order to analyze student work productivity, discern student strengths and weaknesses, research potential strategies and tailor instruction for all students including students with disabilities and English Language Learners. Teachers will also seek out opportunities for professional development and solicit feedback on practice from supervisors and colleagues as well as initiate important activities to contribute to the profession to improve collaborative teachers that will result in a 2% increase of teachers scoring highly effective in Domain 4 of Advance as measured by formal and informal observations. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Entire Staff Inquiry Teams for Literacy SWD & ELL’s, ACES, Math   Vertical Grade Planning  Collaborative Professional Learning Team  Professional Goals  Professional Goals Benchmark Survey  Monitoring for Results  Math Benchmark Assessments/Ready  Rubrics and Checklists Formative Assessment  iReady Data  Administration, All Classroom Teachers- Cluster, ENL, SETSS, Self Contained September 2018 through June 2019 Level 1 & 2 students, Students with Disabilities, ENLs September 2018 through June 2019 Administration, All Classroom Teachers & Clusters, ENL, SETSS & Self Contained ● 1:1 Conferences ● RTI ● UDL ● Small Group Instruction ● SETSS ● ENL push-in model ● Related Services- OT,PT, Speech ● Academic Intervention Services- Math and ELA 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. P.S. 205 will engage families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent collaborations in order to support their children at home from September 2018-June 2019 via representation of the School Leadership Team, Parent Workshops, Parent Engagement sessions on Tuesdays, Parent 1  Teacher Conferences, Curriculum Conferences, Class and Cluster websites, Clarion Connection-monthly school newsletter, teacher's providing individual academic goals to parents, classroom publishing parties and monthly PTA meetings. All documents sent home as a form of communication are translated in the students native language. Key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight include administration and the Parent Coordinator. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administration, Classroom Teachers, Clusters, ENL Teachers, SETSS, Academic Intervention Services, Parent Coordinator Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA X Title II, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 2% increase of teachers scoring highly effective in Domain 4 of Danielson’s Framework for Teaching as measured by formal and informal observations as evidenced on the Advance MOTP Report and Advance Dashboard. Goal Met. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. As measured by the overall Advance MOTP score via formal and informal observations. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As per the 2017-2018 Quality Review, distributive leadership is valued and encouraged. Our school leadership team inspires teachers to participate in various leadership capacities. All teachers and paraprofessionals have a voice in developing goals and identify strategies to help attain goals. As a school, we have a clear vision established in which bottom lines outline the areas needed to fulfill the school vision. These bottom lines are tracked throughout the year for progress. Through implementation of the Danielson Framework for Teaching, teachers are observed in order to elevate school wide instructional practices and implement strategies that promote professional growth and reflection. The overall Measure of Teacher Practice (MOTP) indicates that 59% of our teacher’s rate effective with only 38% rated highly effective. This overall rating includes all four domains of the Danielson Framework. Our goal is to have more teachers rate Highly Effective in the overall MOTP Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through effective school leadership, all teachers will raise student achievement by continuing their professional growth, and developing and building coherent instructional and social-emotional supports to improve student achievement including English Language Learners, students with disabilities and advanced students. which will result in a 2% increase of teachers scoring highly effective in the overall score of MOTP in Advance as measured by formal and informal observations. as well as a 3% increase on State Exam ELA & Math scores. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?   development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Inquiry work with a focus on Students with Disabilities, and ELL's through a cycle of selecting students as a target population and then focusing on learning conditions that either get changed or are monitored for improvement. These conditions are then transferred to a system level change within the school.  Collaborative Professional Learning Team   RTI team meets monthly to implement special education Intervisitations strategies and materials in the general education classroom  Growth Mindset ● Guidance ● Social Worker ● Afterschool programs ● Academic Intervention Services- Math and ELA ● RTI 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All Teachers September 2018 through June 2019 Administration, All Teachers Administration, All Classroom Teachers September 2018 through June 2019 Level 1 and 2 students, Students with Disabilities, ENLs How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. P.S. 205 will engage families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home through parent workshops on topics such as Growth Mindset, Student of the Month, the School's Bottom Lines at PTA Meetings and School Leadership Team Meetings throughout the school year from September 2018-June 2019. Key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight include Administration and the Parent Coordinator. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 4  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administration, Teachers, Afterschool Programs, Academic Intervention Services Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 2% increase of teachers scoring highly effective in the overall score of MOTP in Advance as measured by formal and informal observations. Goal met. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. As measured by the overall score of MOTP in Advance as measured by formal and informal observations. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As per the 2017-2018 Quality Review, school leaders and staff communicate high expectations using multiple ongoing support structures to provide parents with feedback about their children’s progress and they establish a learning culture for students based upon research-based practices that is aligned to the standards. Parents are aware of and understand their children’s progress towards schoolwide expectations. Students are provided with ongoing feedback and support to prepare for their next level of learning. As part of the Chancellor’s initiative we participated in two Parent Teacher Conferences- one in the Fall and a second one in the Spring, as well as two Parent Conferences one in the Fall and one in the Spring. Attendance at the Fall conference for both the afternoon and evening was 1,107 parents and for the Spring conference 1,046 parents. Our attendance at the Fall Parent Conference was 705 and for the Spring Conference 591. Our goal is to have an increase in attendance at each of the Parent Conferences during the 2018-2019 school year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all staff will use various methods of parent engagement via parent newsletters, class websites, Parent Teacher Association meetings, school website and parent workshops to improve strong family ties that will result in a 2% increase in attendance at both the Fall and Spring Parent Conferences as measured by attendance sheets gathered from each teacher from all conferences. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). School Websites  Class Websites   Parent Newsletters  Cluster websites  Clarion Connection- monthly school newsletter  PTA Meetings  Publishing parties in which parents are invited to share student work at the culmination of a literacy unit. Family Fun Days & Night hosted by the school.   PTA meetings highlighting student of the month.  Mommy and Me Workshops- parents come up to do a craft activity during the holiday season.  Translated Letters to Families  Translation services available to families for parent workshops held at the school.  Curriculum Conferences Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teachers. Parent Coordinator, PTA Monthly September 2018 through June 2019 Administration, All Teachers Parents and guardians of ENLs September 2018 through June 2019 Administration, All Teachers, Parent Coordinator 7  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. BCA, American Chinese Sunshine House Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administration, Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Translation Services, Parent Teacher Conferences, School Messenger,Book of the Month, Marquis Studio, Music Program, Ballroom Dance Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February of 2019 there will be a 2% increase in the number of parents that have attended the Family Night and Fall Parent Conferences. We had a 1% increase and will work towards a 2% increase for Spring conferences. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Fall Parent Conference Attendance Sheets Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) State Test Scores, DRA Levels, Writing Samples State Test Scores, PARC Benchmarks, Beginning and End of Year Benchmarks Teacher Recommendation based on unit assessments DRA Levels,Non-Fiction Writing Samples Teacher recommendation Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Orton Gillingham, Guided Reading, Close Reading with sample Common Core questions Math in Focus Reteach or Previous Year Curriculum, Sample Common Core questions Sample Science questions Guided reading incorporating literacy within the content areas Conversations with students, family involvement, counseling Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group, one-to-one During the school day, after school Small group During the school day, after school Small group After school Small group During the school day One-to-one, small group During the school day 9  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) At the present time we have 45 children. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students are provided with a school book bag and school supplies such as notebooks, pencils, etc. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 0  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 1  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Use of IIM, Questioning Techniques, Orton Gillingham, Rubrics and Grading policies, Close Reading 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional Development, Math/Literacy Coach, Mentoring, Intervisitation, Instructional Leads, MOSL, Technology Workshops, Inquiry Teams, Collaborative Professional Learning Team Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 2  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Parent Teacher conferences, Parent Involvement Activities and Workshops, Open House, Aligned curriculum, Early Intervention 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Inquiry Team, Professional Collaborative Learning Team, MOSL 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 838,260.00 118,045.00 38,576.00 13,232.00 5,918,217.00 X X X X X 12,15,17,21,23 12,15,17,21,23 12,15,17,21,23 12,15,17,21,23 12,15,17,21,23 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 3  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 4  5  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 205, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 205 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 6  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; 7  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 205 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: 8  ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; 9  ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; 0  ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. P.S.205 School-Parent Compact: The Clarion School P.S.205, and the parents of the students participating in activities, services, and programs funded by Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) (participating children), agree that this compact outlines how the parents, the entire school staff, and the students will share the responsibility for improved student academic achievement and the 1  means by which the school and parents will build and develop a partnership that will help children achieve the State’s high standards. This school-parent compact is in effect during school year 2018-2019 School Responsibilities P.S.205 will: 1. Provide high-quality curriculum and instruction in a supportive and effective learning environment that enables the participating children to meet the State’s Common Core Learning Standards as follows:  We will provide high quality curriculum and instruction to all students using small group, large group, and individualized instruction in order to enable all students to meet the State’s Common Core Learning Standards. 2. Hold parent-teacher conferences (at least twice annually in elementary schools) during which this compact will be discussed as it relates to the individual child’s achievement. Specifically, those conferences will be held both in the daytime and evening to enable the greatest possible parent participation. 3. Provide parents with frequent additional reports on their children’s progress. Specifically, the school will provide three formal reports (report cards). Frequent reports to parents on their child’s progress will be made available through informal teacher assessment. 4. Provide parents reasonable access to staff. Specifically, staff will be available for consultation with parents during daily preparation periods, as well as designated parent teacher conferences and parent curriculum conferences days. Teachers are available by phone or by individualized appointments. 5. Provide parents opportunities to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities during Parent Open School Week, monthly assemblies and writing celebrations. 6. Involve parents in the planning, review, and improvement of the school’s parental involvement policy, in an organized, ongoing, and timely way. 7. Involve parents in the joint development of any School wide Program plan (for SWP schools), in an organized, ongoing, and timely way. 8. Hold an annual meeting to inform parents of the school’s participation in Title I, Part A programs, and to explain the Title I, Part A requirements, and the right of parents to be involved in Title I, Part A programs. The school will convene the meeting at a convenient time to parents, and will offer a flexible number of additional parental involvement meetings, such as in the morning or evening, so that as many parents as possible are able to attend. The school will invite to this meeting all parents of children participating in Title I, Part A programs(P.S.205 being a SWP school services all students with Title I funds), and will encourage them to attend. 9. Provide information to parents of participating students in an understandable and uniform format, including alternative formats upon the request of parents with disabilities, and, to the extent practicable, in a language that parents can understand. 10. Annually provide to parents during September curriculum conferences information in a timely manner about Title I, Part A programs that includes a description and explanation of the school’s curriculum, the forms of academic assessment used to measure children’s progress, and the proficiency levels students are expected to meet. 2  11. On the request of parents, provide opportunities for regular meetings for parents to formulate suggestions, and to participate, as appropriate, in decisions about the education of their children. The school will respond to any such suggestions as soon as practicably possible. 12. Provide to each parent an individual student report about the performance of their child on the Common Core assessments in at least Math, and English Language Arts. 13. Provide each parent timely notice when their child has been assigned or has been taught for four (4) or more consecutive weeks by a teacher who is not highly qualified within the meaning of the term in section 200.56 of the T Parent Responsibilities We, as parents, will support our children’s learning in the following ways:  Monitoring attendance.  Making sure that homework is completed.  Monitoring amount of television their children watch.  Participating in my child’s classroom activities as needed.  Participating, as appropriate, in decisions relating to my child’s education.  Promoting positive use of my child’s extracurricular time.   Staying informed about my child’s education and communicating with the school by promptly reading all notices from the school or the school district either received by my child or by mail and responding, as appropriate. Serving, to the extent possible, on policy advisory groups, such as being the Title I, Part A parent representative on the school’s School Improvement Team, the Title I Policy Advisory Committee, the District wide Policy Advisory Council, the State’s Committee of Practitioners, the School Support Team or other school advisory or policy groups. Beth Grater, Principal Date _________________________ P.S. 205 The Clarion School P.S. 205 Parent Involvement School Plan P.S.205 agrees to implement the following statutory requirements:  The school will put into operation programs, activities and procedures for the involvement of parents, consistent with section 1118 of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). Those programs, activities and procedures will be planned and operated with meaningful consultation with parents of participating children.  The school will ensure that the required school-level parental involvement policy meets the requirements of section 1118(b) of the ESSA, and includes, as a component, a school-parent compact consistent with section 1118(d) of the ESSA. 3  The school will incorporate this parental involvement policy into its school improvement plan.  In carrying out the Title I, Part A parental involvement requirements, to the extent practicable, the school will provide full opportunities for the participation of parents with limited English proficiency, parents with disabilities, and parents of migratory children, including providing information and school reports required under section 1111 of the ESSA in an understandable and uniform format and, including alternative formats upon request, and, to the extent practicable, in a language parents understand.  The school will involve the parents of children served in Title I, Part A programs in decisions about how the 1 percent of Title I, Part A funds reserved for parental involvement is spent.  The school will be governed by the following statutory definition of parental involvement, and will carry out programs, activities and procedures in accordance with this definition:  Parental involvement means the participation of parents in regular, two-way, and meaningful communication involving student academic learning and other school activities, including ensuring: o o o o that parents play an integral role in assisting their child’s learning; that parents are encouraged to be actively involved in their child’s education at school; that parents are full partners in their child’s education and are included, as appropriate, in decision-making and on advisory committees to assist in the education of their child; the carrying out of other activities, such as those described in section 1118 of the ESSA. the school will inform parents and parental organizations of the purpose and existence of the Parental Information and Resource Center in the State. 1. P.S.205 will take the following actions to involve parents in the joint development of its school parental involvement plan under section 1112 of the ESSA: Action: The School Leadership Team will act as a consultative body for development of the school parental involvement plan. 2. P.S.205 will take the following actions to involve parents in the process of school review and improvement under section 1116 of the ESSA: Action: The School Leadership Team will act as a consultative body to involve parents in the process of school review and improvement. 3. P.S.205 will provide the following necessary coordination, technical assistance, and other support in planning and implementing effective parental involvement activities to improve student academic achievement and school performance: Action: We will report to parents on their children’s progress regularly, allow parents to have access to school personnel for conferences and allow for open access to the school to observe program activities. In addition, we will increase the number of parent workshops to offer support to parents in working with their children at home, include instructional information at PTA meetings to increase parent participation, and provide translators to facilitate communication. 4. P.S.205 will coordinate and integrate Title I parental involvement strategies with parental involvement strategies under the following other programs: Action: Upon selection of students who will receive academic interventions, parents will be given the opportunity to observe a lesson between their child and teacher. This opportunity will allow parents to view firsthand the kind of instruction their child will receive. They will be provided with instructional strategies that they can use at home with their child. 4  5. P.S.205 will take the following actions to conduct, with the involvement of parents, an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parental involvement policy in improving school quality. The evaluation will include identifying barriers to greater participation by parents in parental involvement activities (with particular attention to parents who are economically disadvantaged, are disabled, have limited English proficiency, have limited literacy, or are of any racial or ethnic minority background). The school will use the findings of the evaluation about its parental involvement policy and activities to design strategies for more effective parental involvement, and to revise, if necessary (and with the involvement of parents) its parental involvement policies. (List actions, such as describing how the evaluation will be conducted, identifying who will be responsible for conducting it, and explaining what role parents will play) Action: A survey will be conducted to collect data from parents with regard to participation by parents in parental involvement activities offered throughout the school year. In addition, an evaluation of the effectiveness of our parental involvement policy will be included. 6. P.S.205 will build the schools’ and parent’s capacity for strong parental involvement, in order to ensure effective involvement of parents and to support a partnership with the parents, and the community to improve student academic achievement, through the following activities specifically described below: The school will provide assistance to parents of children served by the school, as appropriate, in understanding topics such as the following, by undertaking the actions described in this paragraph – 1. the State’s academic content standards 2. the State’s student academic achievement standards 3. the State and local academic assessments including alternate assessments, the requirements of Part A, how to monitor their child’s progress, and how to work with educators: 4. Pamphlet (in English and translated versions) that provide instructional information  Resource Information (in English and translated versions) o Annual workshops on state assessments will be provided. Curriculum Conferences will also inform parents of grade wide standards and curriculum components. 1. The school will provide materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their children’s academic achievement, such as literacy training, and using technology, as appropriate, to foster parental involvement, by: Action: Parents will receive bi-monthly newsletters outlining the units of study. Parent workshops are also provided to facilitate with daily homework. These methods will help parents in supporting their child’s academic success. Parent Workshops are offered twice a month in all areas of education based on parent surveys. 2. The school will, with the assistance of its parents, educate its teachers, pupil services personnel, principal and other staff, in how to reach out to, communicate with, and work with parents as equal partners, in the value and utility of contributions of parents, and in how to implement and coordinate parent programs and build ties between parents and schools, by: Action: Our Parent Coordinator will meet regularly with staff members to communicate common parental concerns and provide strategies for effective and increased parental outreach efforts. 3. The school will, to the extent feasible and appropriate, coordinate and integrate parental involvement programs and activities. with Head Start, Early Reading First, Even Start, Home Instruction Programs for Preschool Youngsters, the Parents as Teachers Program, that encourage and support parents in more fully participating in the education of their children, by: 5  Action: A parent lending library will be established for literacy and mathematics. This will allow parents to borrow books related to their child’s curriculum. 4. The school will take the following actions to ensure that information related to the school and parent- programs, meetings, and other activities, is sent to the parents of participating children in an understandable and uniform format, including alternative formats upon request, and, to the extent practicable, in a language the parents can understand: Action: All school communications to parents will be sent in English and translated versions and translators will be provided at all P.T.A. meetings. The School Parental Involvement Policy may include additional paragraphs listing and describing other discretionary activities that the school, in consultation with its parents, chooses to undertake to build parents’ capacity for involvement in the school and school system to support their children’s academic achievement, such as the following discretionary activities listed under section 1118(e) of the ESSA: School Goals for Parental Involvement  We will meet regularly with parents to explain school programs and activities. Meeting times will be varied to support parent attendance  We will report to parents on their children’s progress regularly  Parents will have access to school personnel for conferences  We will send monthly school newsletters and bi-monthly grade newsletters with translations.  Parents will have open access to the school to observe program activities  We will increase distribution of instructional resources for parents which may include handbooks, homework helper ideas, resource information, etc.  Parents will maintain an active role on the school leadership team  We will increase the number of parent workshops offered to parents to provide support for parents in working with their children at home  We will provide translators when needed  We will increase the use of translated correspondence to parents  We will continue offering parent ENL classes using Rosetta Stone  We will offer school and class websites This School Parental Involvement Policy has been developed jointly with, and agreed on with, parents of children participating in Title I, Part A programs, as evidenced by attendance at school leadership. This policy was adopted by the Clarion School October 2018 and will be in effect for the school year of 2018-2019. The school will distribute this policy to all parents of participating Title I, Part A children on or before January, 2019. 6  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 7  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: P.S. 205, situated in the Bensonhurst section of Brooklyn, is a medium sized, accessible, urban school with a diverse population of 1310 students in Pre-Kindergarten through Grade 5. The total number of classes in the school is fifty three, ten of which are self contained special education classes. Both monolingual English and bilingual classes serve our student population in special education. Our general education students are serviced through monolingual classes. According to the latest available ethnic data, 19.08% of the students are White, approximately 1.22% are Black, 21.37% are Hispanic or Latino and others, and 57.71% are Asian. Approximately, 17.18% of the students have Individualized Educational Plans (IEP’s) and receive instruction in self contained classes and related services, such as speech and language, counseling, occupational therapy, physical therapy and adaptive physical education. Additionally, 22.98% of the students are English Language Learners (ELLs) with Chinese as the dominant language among the vast majority. P.S. 205 is a Title I school. P.S. 205 will provide an after school ELL Academy for Grades 1-5 Entering, Emerging, Transitioning and Expanding ELL students. The program will take place for 19 sessions from November through January two days per week for one hour long sessions from 2:30 through 3:30. Parents of ENL students will be notified about the program via an invitation letter that is translated. Follow-up notices in home languages are then sent home as well. Four licensed ENL teachers as well as twelve classroom teachers and one gym teacher will work during those 19 sessions servicing a total of twelve classes comprised of ELL students grouped by level of English language proficiency as well as reading level. The four licensed ENL teachers will serve as team teachers for the twelve classroom teachers by guiding the content area teachers to best facilitate a lesson using the Award Program to meet the needs of the group on a rotating basis in the twelve classrooms and to assist them with lesson planning.The 4 ENL teachers will team teach and model for 30 minutes with one group while other students work independently and then will work with an additional 4 groups on Tuesdays. The same routine will be followed on Wednesdays with the additional groups. The classroom teacher will incorporate the strategies presented during the modeling and team teaching while the ESL teacher is not present with their group. This approach allows for collaboration among the staff as well as an opportunity for students to work independently in small groups. Additionally students will participate in gym using Move To Improve on a rotating basis thus allowing for planning time for the classroom and ENL teachers. Instruction will be in English. The program will address the areas of listening, speaking, reading and writing in English Language Arts with a focus on fiction reading and writing as well as non fiction reading and writing in the Content Areas. Vocabulary instruction in the content areas will be incorporated. This Title III program will supplement the regular mandated ENL instruction that the children receive. Based on an analysis of the data from the NYSESLAT and NYS ELA the ELL population is not making adequate progress in the area of writing based on the CCLS as well as content based questions. Of the 328 students who took the NYSESLAT, 82 of the students advanced one proficiency level. Our goal is to have more students advance at least one proficiency level. Data analysis indicates that 91 of the students scored low in writing in grades 1-5 thus making writing our area of focus. In order to address the diverse needs of our ELLs, P.S. 205 will incorporate the supplemental use of Award ReadingInteractive Reading 8  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Program. Award Reading supports English Language Learners through the supplemental use of the interactive program by building background knowledge, emphasizing vocabulary, modeling, use of hands on materials and visuals (multisensory) as well as explicit instruction that is sequential. Award Reading is aligned to the CCLS and uses high interest informational content connected to Social Studies and Science as well as realia, visuals,sentence frames, animation and listening in order to support scaffolding of language and content knowledge. Writing skills are developed and strengthened through creative and increasingly challenging written responses. Additionally, the program will offer the students leveled books to meet their individual reading and language needs. P.S. 205 will purchase additional leveled books to be used during the after school Title III ELL Academy. Home language support will be provided via notices as well as parent resources in a variety of languages. Each of the 12 classroom teachers will take attendance at he start of their session. Records will be maintained in the teacher's attendance folder and will be collected and transferred to the afterschool attendance binder. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: One of the Non-negotiable Bottom Lines of P.S. 205 is to continue to differentiate the curriculum in order to support struggling students and ELLs through small group instruction. P.S. 205 chose to incorporate the Award Interactive Reading Program during the ELL afterschool program to accomplish this. The first step will be that the teachers working the Title III program will be trained by a consultant from Award Interactive Reading Program. The consultant will train teachers at no cost to the school. The consultant will train the staff in the use of Award Program and how to address the language needs of ELLs through the use of their interactive materials. The professional development will support the Title III teachers in the use of the Award Interactive Reading Program by modeling for teachers how to incorporate the use of realia, visuals, sentence frames, animation and listening in order to scaffold language content knowledge. This will positively impact the progress of the ELL's attending the program by providing quality instruction. A focus will also be placed on discussion and questioning techniques before, during and after reading. Additionally P.S. 205 will provide professional development to both Title III teachers as well as teachers who service Title III students through an independent provider at a cost to the program with a focus on comprehension and ELLs. Agendas as well as attendance sheets for all professional development sessions will be maintained in the P.S. 205 Professional Development Binder. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration  topics to be covered 9  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities  name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities Begin description here: P.S. 205 is committed to providing ongoing parental involvement. Using the Title I 1% parental involvement funds, P.S. 205 provides at least two parent workshops per month on Thursdays during the school day for our parents of ELL’s. for the duration of one hour. In order to supplement the parental workshops and classes taking place already, P.S. 205 will offer parents of ELL’s one parent support workshop after school which will be given by the ENL teachers for an hour. Parents will be notified via letters to the parents in the languages they speak as well as through the school website, grade level websites and the schoolwide Clarion newsletter.Topics addressed at these workshops will include how to utilize the Award Interactive Reading materials as resources for parents of ELL’s as well as maintaining native language in the home setting. Books will be purchased in Native Languages to be distributed to parents so this can be accomplished. Additionally parents are welcome to visit classrooms during the Award Reading instructional program to gain insight on how the program is implemented and how to support their children at home. Agendas, attendance sheets as well as invitations in parents' preferred languages will be maintained in the Title III Parent Workshop Binder. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) 0 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Travel Other TOTAL 1  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 20 School Name The Clarion School Borough Brooklyn School Number 205 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Beth Grater Coach Tomiko Sharpnack ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ms. Jiena Mei Teacher/Subject Area Sofia Asaro/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Cigdem Kurun/ENL Related-Service Provider Superintendent Karina Costantino Assistant Principal Feiga Mandel Coach School Counselor Marinella Amato Parent Parent Coordinator Cindy Chen Field Support Center Staff Member Christine Etiennee Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 7 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 3 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1281 2 Total number of ELLs 332 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 25.92%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Yiddish and Chinese If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 0 1 4 1 2 0 3 1 K 0 1 Lang. Yiddish Chinese Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 1 1 0 1 5 1 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 3 2 0 0 0 0 5 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Currently P.S. 205 utilizes the DRA and Words Their Way as tools of assessing early literacy skills. This assessment is administered to every student in school. The assessment is an efficient method of assessing the ELL performance in the areas of fluency, accuracy and comprehension. In addition once the assessments are conducted ,the students are grouped based on reading levels as well as their language needs. The information is shared between the ENL and classroom teachers so both teachers can plan together and utilize the information to differentiate instruction for the ELLS in his/her class. In addition to DRA scores, the ENL teacher will carefully examine the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT scores when planning instruction. Data patterns reveal Entering and Emerging students who are scoring below or approaching level benchmarks, are showing steady growth. Curriculum is aligned with Common Core Standards, and the teacher created rubric is made for each genre. Rubrics are evaluated to help support ELL's needs. For example, if the rubric showed the struggled with providing a clear sequence, that would be our next step. 3  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? ENL teachers and classroom teachers are given the appropriate time to assess the students using the DRA and Words Their Way as well as completing running records. Students are then grouped based on their level and their needs (maximum of 5 students in a group). Assessment materials are available in each room and additional support and materials are available by our Coach. All assessments are ongoing 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The summative assessments that are being used to identify baseline, progress, and areas of need are as follows: we use the NYSESLAT scores and trends across the years and the number of students who have reached proficiency on the NYSESLAT as well the data from the Monitoring For Results (DRA, Running Records, Words Their Way) and the number of ELLs making progress towards grade level standards. In addition, P.S.205 also administers the Math and ELA performance task to determine the area of strength and needed support to drive instruction. Teachers collaborate and monitor student performance to create and share their next steps of instruction based on grade standards. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The structures that we have in place after gathering the data to address interventions is meeting with the parents and RTI team to discuss the student's progress. The RTI Team creates individual goals for the student. Parents are informed that their child will be pulled-out working in a smaller setting during the day. AIS teachers, Classroom teachers, and ENL teachers collaborate to ensure the student's goal is reached and progress is monitored. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] .The school utilizes DRA assessments along with NYSESLAT, NYSITELL test score analysis in the four modalities, language development checklists and content area tests to identify students in need of RTI. In addition the universal screening with the Home Language Identification Survey with a student interview is also closely examined. Based on the data of the student, if an ELL is not meeting benchmarks, the student is flagged at-risk and support is provided via RTI framework. The student receives Academic Intervention Services and At Risk SETSS. The students needs are correlated with the RTI tiers. Progress is monitored, evaluated, and shared by all service providers at monthly RTI meetings. We use the ELDAT to determine the At-Risk levels of our ELLs as well. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The following information from the EDAT indicates the following results of Proficiency Level advancements for NYSESLAT test takers :2 students went up 3 levels, 21 students advanced 2 levents. 96 students students scored one level higher. 108 students score at the same level. Last, 10 students regressed one level. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Using the NYSESLAT scores,ELDAT, and Language Progressions, we are able to identify our students into groups based on which modality they need further instruction in to be proficient. We use our Standalone time to target these groups and develop their literacy skills in the modality of need and drive instruction.There is then collaborating and monitoring based on their next steps, grade standards, and language progression standards. For example, 1st grade showed deficiency in writing, so the ENL teacher used Stand-Alone time to work on their writing skills using the progressions. Part IV: ELL Programming 4  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Part 154 requires each school to provide an ENL program based on a student's English language proficiency levels in listening, speaking, reading and writing. The grade span of English Language Learners (ELLs) receiving instruction together do not exceed two grade levels. Our English as a New Language (ENL) instruction should be provided in substantially equal daily allotments of time.1 unit of study (or its equivalent) = 180 minutes per week. 2 units of study = 360 minutes per week. As per CR Part 154, English as a New Language instruction is required to beLanguage instruction is required to be offered through two models. One is through Integrated ENL/ESL . At P.S. 205, our ENL teachers are scheduled to push-in to the heterogeneous classrooms. They are required to co-teach with the classroom teacher. Both teachers plan instruction using ESL methodologies in content areas while students are expected to strive to achieve common core standards in content areas.Designing and delivering instruction that is culturally and linguistically appropriate for all diverse learners, including those with Individualized Educational Programs (IEP). Providing integrated language and content instruction to support language development through language-focused scaffolds. Teachers collaborate using data and observations in language development and content to promote academic achievement in all content areas. Teachers use a variety of materials and instructional resources that are linguistically and aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS). For example, the ENL teacher will co-teach with the General Education Teacher and incorporate Realia, the language stem, and language goals for the students. This will gradually turn into a better understanding of the unit that is being completed.The second model is Standalone ENL/ESL . Students receive English language development instruction taught by a NYS certified ENL teacher in order to acquire the English language needed for success in core content areas. Freestanding English as a new language program provides instruction in English with home langauge support, emphasizing English language acquisition. During the mini-lesson, the ENL teacher pulls a homogeneous group based on skill-set and uses the Language Progression Standards and the grade standards to teach. For example, if 2nd grade in reading is working on the 5W's; the ENL teacher uses the Language Progression Standards on the same unit. b. TBE program. If applicable. PS 205 currently has one Transitional Bilingual Education ACES Yiddish class grades 3-5. We also have two TBE Chinese classes in K and 1. The teachers are proficient in both Mandarin and Cantonese. The Transitional Bilingual Education classes are homogeneously grouped. According to CR Part 154, the language arts instructional component of Bilingual Education programs includes Native Language Arts (NLA) instruction, English as a second language (ESL) instruction, and English language arts (ELA) instruction as prescribed by the requirements based on the student's English proficiency level. The following content areas are taught in Yiddish, Chinese, and English: Social Studies, Science, and Reading.The English as a New Language (ENL) component of a Bilingual Education program includes instruction to develop skills in the four modalities; listening, speaking, reading, and writing and in English through the integration of academic content . The time requirements for ENL instruction within a bilingual education program are the same as for ENL instruction within a free-standing ENL program. The curriculum for the ENL component of a bilingual education program and are based on the Learning Standards. The teachers use both languages to ensure content is being understood c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? All eligible ENL students identified by the Spring 2017 NYSESLAT, as well as the 2017 NYSITELL, are provided within our Free-Standing ESL program or Transitional Bilingual Chinese Program based on Parent Choice. They are automatically placed in 5  our Transitional Education Yiddish Program. Each of our seven certified ENL teachers work with several ENL groups based on the CR-Part 154 regulation that requires 360 minutes for our Entering and Emerging students with two units of study per week , 360 minutes, which is composed of 1 unit of study of ENL standalone model with 180 minutes of instruction and one unit of the integrated model in ENL/ELA. Also, Transitioning and Expanding students receive one unit of study in ENL/ELA or in content areas, for 180 minutes a week. In addition, former ELLs continue to receive integrated ENL or ELA or in content area such as Science of Social Studies for 90 minutes a week for two years . All standalone periods are taught by licensed ENL teachers. Integrated ENL is when students receive core content area (i.e., English Language Arts, Math, Science, or Social Studies) and English language development instruction which includes home language supports and appropriate ELL scaffolds carried out by a combination of ENL and common branch certified teachers. In the integrated model the ENL teacher pushes in to ensure all students are receiving support through ESL Methodologies. Home language materials are provided as dictionaries, glossaries, flashcards. Our Curriculum Maps for Literacy are based on the CCLS. Within each lesson structures are in place to meet the needs of ELLs. Included are language stems, vocabulary words, scaffolded questions and the use of UDL and Progressions. In September, we print out an RLAT to identify every ELL in the building and their proficiency level. We use our in-school generated STARS entry form which indicates the level, and allocated minutes for stand-alone and integrated. We complete the form with all of our student's names; including our former ELL's. The Data gets inputted by our Pupil Secretary and overseen by our Assistant Principal, Mr. Silverman. We use the monthly STARS updates to ensure the minutes are being met to the best of our capacity. Once we receive a report we make sure our records are correct and update as necessary. For every new admit and transfer student, the same process applies to ensure all students are getting the mandated number of minutes to the best of our ability. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Classroom teachers, the AIS providers, content area teachers and ENL teachers use a variety of resources and materials to address the needs of our ELLs. In order to make language and content comprehensible, visuals, realia, manipulatives, pictures, Smart Boards, and document cameras are utilized in teaching all subject areas. All of this is used to help develop social and academic vocabulary. These are used for reinforcing the four language skills of listening, speaking, reading and writing. In addition, educational software and instructional technology such as Brian Pop, Brain Pop jr, Big Universe and Pebble Go are used for core content. Native language literature and bilingual dictionaries are available to the students to enhance their language proficiency and academic performance. Language objectives and structures are incorporated in each lesson. Throughout the content areas, graphic organizers (such as KWL charts and Venn diagrams) and visuals are used. There is the additional use of bilingual dictionaries, books and as well as word-to word glossaries offered in math, science and social studies. The ENL program incorporates several approaches and methods to make content comprehensible and to enrich language development. In the Natural Approach, teachers provide language input that learners can understand. Comprehension is facilitated by using visual aids, gestures, commands for physical actions (e.g. Total Physical Response), sentence expansions and open-ended sentences. Content area instruction will be presented using the Natural Approach technique. Therefore, conceptual learning will be combined with language learning. When appropriate, the Language Experience Approach, as well as Total Physical Response methodology during the ENL instructional program. Teachers utilize differentiated instructional approaches so that ELL students receive the support that they require. Our school has implemented the Math in Focus program, which is aligned to the Common Core State Standards. This program is designed to faciliate differnentiated instruction and activites, including built in vocabulary support in every unit. Each lesson includes suggestions for instructional strategies to support English Language Learners. This program is available through Think-Central, and offers many valuable resources to support our ELL families at home. Teaching strategies (including questioning, scaffolds in English and/or native language where appropiate, and routines) strategically provide multiple entry points and high quality supports and extentions into the curricula so that all learners, including ELLs and SWDs, are engaged in appropiatley challenging tasks and demonstrate higher-order thinking skills in student work products. Standalone ENLs, are provided with small group/differentiated instruction in all grades. Teachers of Entering and Emerging ELLs regularly conference them instructionally and then use the data to determine their academic progress and needs 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 6  ELLs take the State tests (besides the ELA test) in their native languages if it is available. Teachers assess the Bilingual Yiddish and Chinese students both formally and informally in Yiddish and Chinese through observations and checklists as well as through the NYSAA activities. Throughout the year teacher made tests are given to students in their Native language or via a translated version or with the help of a translator. Also, students are given native language reading material. Instructional materials and books are standards-based and age appropriate 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Currently have one SIFE and no Long Term student. We would address the needs of these students by providing them the same differentiated instruction and after school programs that are offered to all ELLs. All instruction is Common Core Standards-aligned and differentiated through small group and individualized instruction. Project-based learning and cooperative learning with their peers are provided. SIFE students receive a minimum of 360 minutes of ENL/ELA instruction. In order to address the needs of ELLs in U.S. schools for less than three years, the newcomers at P.S. 205 are provided differentiated small group instructions in reading , phonics, and writing with differentiated language goals for core learning. We pull them for Standalone time and use the language progressions to make sure targets are hit. AIS services incorporates the use of Ortho Academy for ELLs Additionally, P.S. 205 uses Words Their Way to address the phonics, reading, and writing needs of these students. Special needs students who are identified as ELLs receive ENL services via the push-in model Stand- alone periods and co-teaching . The instructional plan for ELLs includes the use of the Push-in model, collaborative teaching, guided reading, small group instruction, and Reading A to Z. These programs are used for both newcomers, developing ELLs and ELLs receiving services for 4-6 years in different intensities depending on the child's level of English proficiency.Long-Term ELLs would receive differentiated small group instruction and guided reading. They are also placed in the after school programs including test prep afterschool program. They are also targeted for intervention services. In order to continue transitional support for ELLs reading proficiency on the NYSESLAT, these students are placed in the push-in model classrooms. Former ELLs continue to receive their appropriate testing accommodations for two years and is provided with differentiated small group instruction to meet the Common Core Learning Standards. They are invited to participate in our Test Prep Academy offered prior to taking state exams. Additionally, during the NYS ELA and Math exams, former ELLs receive the recommended ELL accommodations for up to two years. Accommodations include extended time (i.e. time and a half of productive test-taking), separate location and/or small group administration 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELL-SWD use the grade reading and writing curriculum maps based on the Common Core Learning Standards language progressions and modify lessons to their students needs. Teachers of ELL-SWDs utilize such instructional strategies as, explicated instruction, providing handouts and visual aids, graphic organizers word banks, and Realia. Teachers of ELL-SWDs also allow time for clarification of directions and essential information. Scaffolds are put into place via the text being used, use of manipulatives and language stems and prompts to allow SWD access to the grade level content. Students in our ACES Transitional Bilingual Education class incorporate their academic maps , social maps and plan together as a grade and have cross grade planning incorporating language progressions in home language instruction and content. Teachers support the ELL-SWDs using color coded content board Black for English and Red for Yiddish. Grade level materials curriculum maps are used to scaffold learning for our students. Indicators as well as life skills with an emphasis on expressive and receptive language are incorporated. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? As per student IEP, ELL-SWD students receive academic and linguistic support, in the least restrictive environment. Paraprofessionals, ENL teachers, classroom teachers and cluster teachers work closely with these students to help with their specific educational needs and accommodations. Based on their progress assessment and individual needs, 7  small group/one-on-one/differentiated instruction is provided to students in the classroom.Technology such as Smart Boards, computer-based literacy program with rich visual support such as Brain Pop and Brain Pop jr, Pebble Go, Big Universe are implemented in the classrooms learning. Their interventions are monitored closely by the ENL teacher, classroom teacher the School Assessment Team (SAT), as well as the guidance counselor to ensure that each student is receiving the appropriate interventions. Also, flexible programming is used to maximize mainstreaming for content area. The Speech, OT, and PT providers schedule the programs where they feel the students will not miss out on pertinent subject areas. The ENL teachers also collaborate to make sure their students are not being pulled at the same time as we are pushing-in. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our school is aware of our ELL students’ varying needs in their linguistic development. Teachers provide ELLs with multiple entry points into the curriculum. Teachers incorporate audio visual support, native language support (through buddy system and glossaries), and vocabulary building instruction. Our modified guided reading approach, writing, science, social studies and math programs provide differentiated instuction, strategies and entry points built into lessons, which provide opportunities for all language learners to succeed. Our ELLs receiving 0-3 ENL services in grades kindergarten through first take part in small group activites that provides additional reinforcement of phonics, phonemic awareness and other early literacy skills. Our newcomer ELLs in grades 1 and 2 receive targeted small group instruction from the English Language Learners with AIS for reading Orton GiIlingham program. Our newcomer ELLs in grades 3-5 who are required to take the NYS ELA may receive services in our AIS programs where they receive targeted small group instruction designed to strengthen their literacy, math and content area skills. They are also given the opportunity to participate in the ELL Academy , where small group instruction focuses on reinforcing their English language skills, and content area skills. In addition, they are invited to participate in our Test Prep Academy, weeks prior to NYS ELA and Math exams; where students are taught and reinforced test strategies. This is provided to help succeed at taking the NYS tests. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? . Currently P.S. 205 will continue utilizing the programs that are in place. We will incorporate Wilsons Program for Grades 3,4 and 5 newcomers. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? All programs will remain as is since they have been and continue to be successful. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are offered equal access to all school programs. ELLs are encouraged to participate and are invited to participate by receiving a letter inviting them to attend the programs in their home language and a translated English version with a parent's consent. These programs include Test Prep , Title III ELL-Academy and ballroom dancing. All Ells are exposed to technology in the classroom through the use of Smart Boards, Ipads, and Audio-Listening Centers 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. P.S. 205 utilizes a variety of instructional materials to address the various needs of its ELL population. Instructional materials, including technology, Smart Boards, Elmos, Award Reading, Native Language Libraries, Raz Kids, English Picture Dictionaries and Rigby books. Word to word glossaries are used in math. The Bilingual Yiddish students instructed using variety of books, picture dictionaries, smart board lessons, leveled bilingual libraries, teacher made manipulatives, songs, charts both in their native language and English as well as apps on Ipads Aleph Beis. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is given in our Transitional Bilingual Education classes through instruction in both Yiddish /Chinese (their Home Language) and English. Some students have a paraprofessional who speaks their native language as an extra support. Home Language materials include books in their libraries, dictionaries, content area vocabualry boards in both 8  languages are displayed and color coded in black for English and red for Yiddish Ipads with Apps in Yiddish are used such as Aleph Beis. In our ENL program , native language support is provided in the form of bilingual dictionaries, bilingual glossaries, a buddy sytem is made availble to the students in their home language. Bilingual copies of state tests are also provided if needed. In the event that the state does not have a version of th test in the students lanuage the school makes every effort to provide a certified translator. TBE does not assess in their home language but rather uses their home language to teach them English. For example, in our Chinese TBE she teaches the content in both the home language and English throughout the day. They also have a "home language period" where they access books, and complete activities on the Ipad in their home language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. For reading, students are grouped and serviced by DRA levels and students who are below grade level receive AIS support for struggling readers using Orton-Gillingham. Students language needs are taken into consideration as well. Students are taught the content areas by their current level using differentiated instruction taking into consideration their reading level and English proficiency. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? P.S. 205 does not currently utilize collocation. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). In order to assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year, the classroom teachers as well as the ENL teachers spend a few days on curriculum mapping and modifying instruction for ELLs through the use of appropriate language structures. Newly enrolled ELLs are targeted for AIS services throughout the school day. Parent workshops are organized to meet the needs of the newly enrolled ELLs, ie. homework tips, reading to your child at home in both English and native language. Parents of newly enrolled students are invited to parent workshops on how to assist their children with homework and Literacy based activities in English. As students enroll throughout the school year, ongoing support is given to the parents in developing English language skills via parent workshops. During the school day, students who are newly enrolled have access to Imagine Learning (a computer based program) to support their language development. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Not Applicable to our population. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not Applicable Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The ENL teachers attend their grade's professional development weekly, to get a clear understanding of the Common Core Learning Standards in each content area, so they can be incorporated in their teaching practices. 9  In addition for the 2017-2018 school year, P.S.205 will be receiving professional development from Bankstreet Graduate School. The ENL Consultant assignmed to our school is Lori Falchi. The focus of this professional development will be Writing, due to the results of the 2017 NYSESLAT using the EDAT. This Professional Development will take place over 10 sessions. The dates are as follows: 11/7/17 11/20/17 12/11/17 1/8/18 1/22/18 2/5/18 2/26/18 3/12/18 6/7/18 This will also include 3 Turn Key Sessions in which the ENL teachers will Turn Key this valuable information to our colleagues. These dates will be as follows: 3/5/18 3/6/18 3/13/18 In addition to Bankstreet, we have also signed up for outside professional development as well such as WIlson Training. Another professional development being attended is "Tools for Launching School-Wide Academic Instruction." These professional developments will also be turn keyed to our non pedagogical staff. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Teachers at P.S. 205 receive 15 hours of ELL training. The 15 hours of ELL training are given throughout the school year, on Monday PD days, on the Chancellor's Conference days for staff development. Classroom teachers are given professional development on the best practices for ELLs records of these professional development meetings are kept in the Principal's office. The ENL Department joins for professional development along with our General Education teachers and bilingual teachers because we are all teachers of ELLS, which focuses on the CCLS three time a year during curriculm mapping, monthly grade conferences and faculty conferences as well as every 6 weeks during each grade's cycle of professional development. During these meetings teachers share best practices and lessons they have incorporated using the CCLS. Our curriculum maps which are generated by the classroom teacher and the literacy coach reflect all of the indicators within the CCLS and are used to guide our instruction on a day to day basis. During our meetings all members share texts and excerpts that can be utilized for instruction and how to scaffold these materials for ELLs. Our focus for ELLs continues on perfecting our instruction through the use of Modified Guided Reading for ELLs as well as modifying the language structures, including a language stem for the genre elements to make them accessible for ELLs. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In order to ensure that parents are actively involved in their child’s education teachers schedule individual meetings with parents/ guardians of all students including ELLs to discuss the students progress in the program, lanuage development, 0  lanugage proficiency assesments and lanuage development needs in all content ares in English. Also, in Yiddish and Chinese if they are attending our Transitional Bilinguagl program. These meeting are held on Tuesdays afterschool. Meetings are scheduled in advance by phone or by letter with the parent. The meetings are scheduled with parents to meet in person or held on the phone. Teachers are responsible to keep records of these meetings. We later submit a monthly log at the end of each month to our Principal's Secretary 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. P.S. 205 encourages ELL parent involvement in our school. We hold a Parent Orientation for our ELL parents to explain the programs and inform them of their child's proficiency level. We provide translators so that they feel comfortable asking questions as well as making sure they understand what is being told to them. In January/February we have another parent meeting to explain the NYSESLAT and the expectations of their child. We provide translators as well and work to take home to reinforce what we are doing in school as well. Throughout the year, we also have Family Fun Night, STEAM night, and an Art Exposition for all parents as well. Translators and items in their home language are available for maximum understanding Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 1 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Beth Grater, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P.S. 205 School DBN: 20K205 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Beth Grater Title Principal Feiga Mandel Assistant Principal Joyce Fisher Sofia Asaro ___ Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Maria Marano, Gen. Ed. Teacher/Subject Area Huguette Seng Teacher/Subject Area Tomiko Sharpnack _____ Coach Coach Marinella Amato School Counselor Karina Costantino Cigdem Kurun,ENL Teacher Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 -- 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 -- 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 3  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 20K205 School Name: The Clarion Superintendent: KarinaCostanti The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Leonie Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this Forde Assistant Principal conducted by the Field plan? Yes Kurun Asaro ENL Co-Coordinator ENL Co-Coordinator Yes Yes Yes Yes Language Access Coordinator? Yes Cigdem Sofia * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Our assessment of written translation needs and our major findings are based on the analysis of data as described in our 2015-2016 Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Our assessment of written and oral translation needs and our major finding are based on the analysis of data as described in the School Statistics Quality Guide. Data indicates that 26% of our student population consists of English Language Learners, with 20% Hispanic and 53% Asian. Chinese is the dominant language 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 4  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral PS 205 services special needs students in 2 Bilingual Yiddish classes. Parents' preferred languages include Albanian, Arabic, Cantonese, Hebrew, Mandarin, Russian, Spanish, and Yiddish ALALBANIAN 6 ARARABIC 33 BGBENGALI BANGL BANGLADE 1 0.47 2.56 0.08 0.08 CBCEBUANO 1 39.01 CHCHINESE 502 CNCANTONESE00 HAHAITIAN CREOLE 1 ITITALIAN 2 MNMANDARIN0 NOENGLISH 548 PLPOLISH 3 RURUSSIAN 22 SHSHAN 1 SPSPANISH 147 SUSUDANESE 1 TUTURKISH 1 UDURDU 7 UZUZBEK 8 VNVIETNAMESE 3 0 0.08 0.16 0 42.58 0.23 1.71 0.08 11.42 0.08 0.08 0.54 0.62 0.23 6 36 1 0 467 14 1 2 21 544 3 21 1 0.47 2.8 0.08 0 36.29 1.09 0.08 0.16 1.63 42.27 0.23 1.63 0.08 147 11.42 1 1 9 9 3 0.08 0.08 0.7 0.7 0.23 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. 5  Yiddish & Uzbek Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Clarion Monthly Newsletters, School Calendar Parent Letters Grade News Letters Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We use the following approved by the Department of Education. The Big Word and The Translation and Interpretation (T&I) Unit. Families First of every month First of every month As needed First of of every other month 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 6  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings Formal face to face meetings our school will typically have with parents throughout the school year include parent meetings during parent engagement time, parent teacher conferences, as per the DOE schedule. Curriculum nights, IEP conferences and calls by the administration, teachers, the guidance counselor, and the attendance aide. Each Tuesday, ongoing throughout the school year. How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? We plan to provide interpretation services by using the Department of Education approved vendor, The Big Word and the over the phone Interpretation DOE Language Line. Many of our paraprofessionals speak the languages of our parents and they are paid at a per session rate to interpret during parent teacher conferences. They also provide interpretation on Tuesdays during parent engagement time. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of an emergency, our school will communicate via our twitter account, telephone calls, email. Communication will be interpreted using the methods described earlier. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 7  [The Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 other resources have been shared with staff to ensure compliance. Our Language Access Coordinator and ENL Coordinator work jointly to provide compliance with the regulations. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The guidelines described in the Chancellor's Regulations A663 are followed. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The parent survey is completed by parents and used to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services. 8 
