2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP-CS) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 21K209 School Name: P.S. 209 MARGARET MEAD Principal: FRANCES LOCURCIO 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information PS 209 The Margaret Mead School 21K209 21K209 K-8 School Number (DBN): 2609 East 7 th St Brooklyn, NY 11235 718-743-1954 718-743-6361 Phone Number: Fax: Frances Locurcio FLocurc@schools.yc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Frances Locurcio Elisa Balsamo Peggy Judeh Elizabeth Hirsch GuiseppinaIntravaia NA NA District Information Geographical District: 21 Isabel Dimola Superintendent: 1401 Emmons Ave. Brooklyn Ny 11235 Superintendent’s Office Address: idmolas@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-648-0209 Phone Number: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Brooklyn South MauriciereDeGovia FSC: Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 415 89th St. Brooklyn Ny 11209 Mdegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-7594862 Phone Number: Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Frances Locurcio Elisa Balsamo Peggy Judeh Carolyn Arbia GiuseppinaIntravaia Elizabeth Hirsch Erin Cajano Lily Gacevic *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ parent   GhadeerJudeh HibaSala Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/parent Member/parent Member/ parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? We at PS 209 we believe that all children can learn if provided with the necessary tools. We believe that differentiating and scaffolding can add support for students in order to enhance learning and aid in the mastery of tasks. All students must be provided with rigorous instruction, as well as challenging material rooted in non- fiction text in order to become college and career “ready”. By providing ours students with curriculum rooted in the NYS Common Core Standards, our students will meet the challenges that lie ahead in a competitive collegiate and career- minded world.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS 209 The Margaret Mead School is a vibrant and diverse school in District 21, Brooklyn. Our community is ethnically and culturally diverse and is home to Hispanic, Middle Eastern, Asian, and African American populations. PS 209 currently serves 704 students in Pre-K through grade 8. We have 146 English Language Learners and 186 students with special needs currently enrolled. Our ELL population is serviced by licensed ELL teachers using an integrated and stand-alone model. Our school has implemented ICT classrooms across all grades as well as 12:1:1 classrooms to meet the needs of SWDs. Students in ICT classrooms in our middle school are departmentalized. Special education teachers have the same students for core subjects in order to maximize student rate of success in the middle school. General education students, as well as students with IEPs move from class to class, which helps them prepare for the transition to high school. Instructional focus: We will increase student engagement and achievement through questioning and academic discussions. We developed our instructional focus by looking at data from various sources including Advance and interdisciplinary instructional walk-throughs. We believe all students should have access to the rigorous core curriculum and whereby all students are engaged. In order to bring access to all learners rather than relying only on printed materials and whole class lecture notes, teachers incorporate differentiation small group instruction, individualized instruction, inquiry learning, Universal Design for Learning, and multiple formats to represent information and enhance student engagement, e.g. the use of visuals, technology, or various strategies for solving math problems. Teachers use multimedia collections, including images, sounds, text, video, concept maps, and web links. Teacher Teams collaborate in order to analyze student work and student assessments to identify gaps and individual student needs in order to prepare students for career and college. The Administration, staff, and parents have worked and will continue to work collaboratively in all elements of the Framework for Great Schools to improve student achievement. We have made the most progress this past year in the area of Trust and Rigorous Instruction. At our school, teachers work collaboratively and consistently to revise and adjust curriculum maps, and lesson plans. Evidence of this can be seen across all classrooms. There are clear, high expectations as evidenced by the tasks and grouping of all students. There is a school wide focus on academic vocabulary as evidenced by technical and content based word walls in our classrooms. Assessments are used to drive instruction and to flexibly group students based on their needs. Teaching and Learning is supported by the expansive integration of technology that has become a school wide initiative. All classrooms are equipped with SMART Boards to facilitate sharing of student work and other materials that serve for modeling of instruction. Additionally, there is access to a computer lab and laptop carts. The Margaret Mead School has developed partnerships with various community organizations such as The Italian Federation. The FIAO after school program operates Monday through Friday from 3:00-6:00PM. Offerings include homework help, arts and crafts, drama, theatre, recreation and multicultural activities. These activities are designed to improve academic, social and emotional competencies. P.S. 209 was awarded a 21st Century grant from Community Schools Initiatives.. This grant allows us to implement a program that gives our students the opportunity to participate in various art and stem activities that promote critical thinking skills and creativity. We are also able to further promote health and wellness through classes in dance, soccer and martial arts. 0  3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The Margaret Mead school has a large population of ELL students who have difficulty in comprehension and vocabulary acquisition. We have a 146 English Language Learners currently enrolled in our school. Our ELL population is serviced by licensed ELL teachers using an inter-grated and stand- alone model. PS 209 also has a large SWD population. Our school has implemented ICT classrooms across all grades as well as 12:1:1 classes. Students with IEPs in our middle school are departmentalized. Special education teachers have the same students for core subjects in order to maximize student rate of success in the middle school. General education students, as well as students with IEPs move from class to class, which helps them prepare for the transition to high school. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. We as a school community have made substantial progress in areas of teacher collaboration and establishing trust between staff and administration. Common planning times are schedules in the teachers' programs. Additionally, Tuesday afternoons are allotted for planning in both grade and content areas. Clear expectations are provided through grade meetings between administrative supervisors and staff. Professional learning activities are planned based on staff needs as determined by formal and informal observations. Teachers attending professional learning sessions provided by the district and/or another organization are turn keyed to the staff as well. A clear common goal is expressed through collaboration between administrators and staff. The school focus is shared between administration , staff and parents through staff/parent meetings to establish a collaborative environment. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 21K209 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 733 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 67 67 32 3 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 26 26 3 2 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 80.0% % Attendance Rate 71.9% % Reduced Lunch 19.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.1% 24.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 40.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 16.08 0% 4% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 51.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 89% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES YES N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 111 111 26 93.8% 7.8% 26.3% 3.4% 31.5% 1.0% 4 24% 8 51.9% 77% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School Strength: The 2017-2018 School Quality Guide shows that PS 209 scored well developed in designing coherent curriculum (1.1) Teachers worked in teams to ensure curriculum is aligned to the CCLS. The 2017-2018 School Survey showed 97% of teachers answered positively in the ability to implement common core shifts into lessons. This in turn gave our school a metric rating of "Exceeding Target" Preliminary results show that 10% of students did not meet standards on the NYS Math and ELA Area of Focus: Classroom observations indicated that teachers need to infuse DOK level 3 & 4 questions in to lessons. School Survey results indicate that 30% of teachers feel that they need to work on the quality of discussion going on in classroom. 40% of students do no feel challenged in class. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Through rigorous instruction that provides students opportunities to engage in critical thinking and robust discussion, by June 2019, 75% of students will reach their individualized learning targets in ELA as measured by I-Ready and Ready Gen benchmark assessment. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).   Students in grades 1-8 will take a diagnostic I-Ready assessment in ELA. Students will take Common Core aligned baseline assessments from Ready Gen (grades K-5) and Code X 9GRADES 6-8) in September.  Teachers will evaluate data from the diagnostic I-Ready, Ready Gen and/or Code X baseline assessment in for individualized Learning Targets in ELA for students .  After compiling the data, teachers will develop lesson plans to address the needs of students.  Growth monitoring tests will be assigned monthly in I-Ready for ongoing measures of student progress in ELA. Lesson plans will be revised to include questions to increase student engagement.   Teachers are programmed to meet weekly during grade meetings to look at student work and reflect on units and lesson plans in order to ensure tasks are rigorous and aligned to CCLS.  Teachers will continue to conference with students to    monitor progress and set learning goals. Licensed Special Education teachers will be programmed to teach SWDs in ICT and self-contained classrooms. Scaffolding techniques such as pre-teaching vocabulary for a unit or lesson, chunking information into a smaller or single concept lesson, visual aids, including graphic organizers and exemplar models are utilized to assist SWDs. Licensed ELL teachers will be programmed in push-in/pull –out model to meet the needs of ELL students. Administration Classroom teachers All students in grades k-8 Sept.- Oct. 19, 2018 Oct. 22- 31, 2019 End of every month Sept. 2018-June 2019 4  They will use the six basic scaffolding strategies for ELLs which include, modeling, bridging, Contextualizing, Developing Metacognition, Text Representations and Schema Building. The teachers will also use deconstruct - reconstruct strategies. Students in grades 1-8 will take Mid year benchmark in I-Ready, Ready Gen, and/or code X to monitor progress Students in grades 1-8 will be given end of year I-Ready , Ready Gen and/or Code X benchmark to monitor progress.   Mar 1-15, 2019 May 15-June 21, 2019  Professional Leanings' will be planned to reflect the needs of the teachers based on observations and requests.  Teachers are directed to view webinars which provide updates and clarifications on the I-Ready Platform Classroom teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 Administration 5  Parents are communicated via letters sent home Parents Sept 2018 Administration explaining the vertical scale scores of I-Ready diagnostics (given three times a year) and the school's expectation of students achieving 1 year of growth in reading from September, 2018-June, 2019.  We will maintain ongoing communication with families regarding progress toward meeting school standards and expectations.  PTA meetings will be held at flexible times to accommodate parents/guardians.  Parent Teacher Conferences are conducted twice per year to inform parents of student progress.  Report cards are distributed 3 times per year in  grades K-8. Information regarding periodic assessments and classroom assessments are posted in Skedula/pupil path to keep parents informed of student progress.  Community Schools will provide enrichment activities which will include visual arts, dance, music, martial arts and coding.  Parents will be encouraged to engage students to maximize the help I-Ready provides by using it at home. Sept. 2018-June 2019 Nov. 2018 & Mar. 2019 Nov. 2018, Mar. 2019 and June 2019 September2018-June 2019 Community School Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  PTA meetings will be held at a flexible time, including evening hours, to accommodate working parents/guardians. Parents will discuss Common Core curriculum and ways that they may support instruction at home.  Open school meetings are conducted twice per year to inform parents of student progress.  Report cards are distributed 3 times per year in grades K-8.  Information regarding periodic assessments and classroom assessments are posted in Skedula/Pupilpath to keep parents informed of student progress. I-Ready diagnostic results are sent home to inform parents of their child's individualized academic growth in ELA and math.  6   Fountas and Pinnell levels and a book list with recommended non-fiction titles will be sent home quarterly to help parents to choose books for their children. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. With guidance from administration through clear and consistent articulation of a common instructional vision, teachers will engage in the development and implementation of CCLS aligned curriculum during collaborative planning time once a week. Teachers will also attend Professional Learning sessions during the 2018-2019 school year. Grade meetings and Benchmark meetings will begin in September 2018 and continue till June 2019. Vertical planning teams meet once per month and inquiry teams meet twice a month. ELA Periodic assessment are given in January 2019 Testing Coordinator will schedule periodic assessments. Data Specialist will prepare data for staff that is comprehensive. Administration will support teachers through PL. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E X 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 75% of all students in grades k-8 will reach their individual mid-year ELA goal as measured by I-Ready and Ready Gen ELA mid-year assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) I-Ready and Ready Gen beginning, middle and end of year assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Area of Strength: In 2017-18 the School Quality Report indicated that PS/IS 209 exceeded it target in the area of social emotional supports for students. Data from teacher evaluations using the Danielson Framework for Teaching indicate that the vast majority of classrooms evidence that teachers are able to create safe and supportive environments for student learning. PS 209 has implemented after school programs from FIAO, and Community Schools for students to interact with peers in a safe environment, while participating in enrichment and play activities. Area of focus In 2017-2018 School Survey results showed that 33% of students in PS/IS 209 felt that they did not receive personal attention and support in their classrooms. The results also showed that 31% of students felt that they are not supported by their peers. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Through implementation of school-wide one on one conferencing with students and instruction in the use of peer editing to support student writing, by June 2019, 75% of students in grades 3-8 will meet their individual learning target. This will be evidenced by mastery of the skills outlined in the NYS tests item skills analysis report. The teachers will maintain running logs indicating progress of these skills demonstrated in writing activities provided in class. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Administration will implement a plan for professional learning with a focus on student engagement activities. Teachers will attend PL activities outside of the building and will turn-key to staff.  Members of the staff participated in inter-visitation with other school and implemented best practices. Students in grades K-8 Sept 2018- June 2019 Administration Classroom teachers  Students will take a baseline assessment to determine writing levels. students in grades K-8 September 2018 Classroom teachers  Teacher teams with administrative support will meet to review data from item skills analysis and establish individualized writing goals for students.  Principal and supervisory cabinet will review and provide feedback to teachers on individualized student writing goals. Students will take SchoolNet assessment in   Teachers across all grades will use peer editing sheets during writing workshop.  Teachers conference with students and give constructive feedback on student work.  Classroom teachers will be programmed to meet weekly to revise unit maps, reflect on lesson plans and norm rubric grading system.  Administration will conduct observations and give timely Classroom teachers feedback to teachers  Teachers in grades K-8 will engage in collaborative inquiry monthly to assess progress and analyze student work. Students will familiarize themselves with self-check guides and peer editing checklists.  October 1-October 31st Sept. 2018-June 2019 September 2018- June 2019 Administration 9   Students will participate in Community school program to foster peer relationships and create a safe environment for students to socialize.  Community Schools will implement "Respect for All" , and anti bullying programs for students to feel safe and supported in school.  Community Schools will also provide counseling for students and parents on an as needed basis. Parents September 2018- June 2019 Parent Coordinator PTA, Administration, Classroom teachers, Students in grades K-8 Parents October 2018-June 2019 Community Schools Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight.  Parent workshops will be scheduled on writing strategies that can assist parents on how they can support student progress.  Writing activities such as author's day will engage parents to share their cultural heritage.  PTA meetings will be held at a flexible time to accommodate parents/guardians.  Open school meetings are conducted twice per year to inform parents of student progress.  Report cards are distributed 3 times per year in grades K-8.  Information regarding periodic assessments and classroom assessments are posted on Skedula/Pupilpath to keep parents informed of student progress. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  The Administrative Cabinet will meet weekly to discuss data from assessments and observations.  The Parent Coordinator and PTA will provide information to strengthen parent outreach.  The School Leadership Team will meet monthly to discuss school activities and ways of increasing parent engagement. 0   Grade meetings and Benchmark meetings will begin in September 2018 and will continue till June 2019.  The Testing Coordinator will schedule periodic assessments.  The Data specialist will prepare data for staff that is comprehensive. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 75% of students will meet their mid-year writing goal target as measured by SchoolNet benchmark assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Schoolnet Benchmark assessment will be given 2 times per year: January 2019 and May 2019 Running logs tracking student progress in writing and achieving mastery of skills outlined in the item skills analysis. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. PS 209 scored a metric of exceeding target in the area and cultural awareness and inclusive classroom. There are 146 ENL students enrolled in our school. Teachers across all grades work to make students of all students of all cultures feel safe and supported in the classroom. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Through teacher collaboration and implementation of culturally responsive teaching methodologies, by June 2019 75% of ELL students will reach their individualized reading levels as measured by Fountas and Pinnel and I-Ready assessment. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Fountas and Pinnel assessment is administered I-Ready diagnostic is administered    Administration has programmed Teacher Teams to meet weekly during common planning time. During this time Administration will meet with each team to discuss student progress toward meeting goals.  Cabinet will meet weekly and discuss and analyze data.  Teacher Teams will set SMART goals and implement strategies during a 6-8week cycle.  Teachers will revise lesson and unit plans as needed to reflect best practices and ensure alignment to CCLS. Teacher Teams, Targeted Inquiry students Sept.-Oct. 15, 2108 Teacher Teams, Administration Sept.2018-June 2019 Licensed ENL teachers will be programmed to service students in inter grated and stand alone ENL instruction. Targeted Inquiry students Teacher Teams, Sept. -Oct, 15,2018 Teacher Teams, Administration Information regarding periodic assessments and classroom assessments are posted on pupil path to keep parents informed of student progress. I-Ready diagnostic and Fountas and Pinnel results are sent home to update parents on student academic progress Students in grades k-8 Sept. 2018-June 2019 Classroom Teachers, Testing Coordinator, Administration Oct. 2018 Feb 2019 June 2019    3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  PTA meetings will be held at a flexible time to accommodate parents/guardians.  Open school meetings are conducted twice per year to inform parents of student progress. During these meetings, translation services are provided in as many languages as possible.  Report cards are distributed 3 times per year in grades K-8.  Information regarding periodic assessments and classroom assessments are posted on Skedula/Pupilpath to keep parents informed of student progress. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 3  Administration has scheduled teachers to meet twice weekly for common planning time. Administration will select teachers based on classroom observations to turn key strategies during Professional Learning time. Cabinet meetings will take place weekly to discuss student progress and teaching stratigies Administration will plan Professional Learning activities based on student data and Teacher Team findings. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 75% fo targeted students will reach their mid-year reading level as measured by Fountas and Pinnel and I-Ready assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Fountas and Pinnell reading assessment in grades K and IREADY Benchmark assessment in grades 1-8. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Area of Strength: Administration has developed collaborative teams such as; - Consultation Committee which work to articulate the school vision, deliver instructional and social-emotional support for teachers. - PTA which provide opportunities for administration and parents to share information, ideas and support for members of the school community - SLT meets once a month to share information and to plan collaboratively. Staff members are invited to share information regarding assessments used, grading policy, student behavioral expectations. Parents are given opportunities to voice concerns and to ask questions. Administration has made strategic programming decisions that allow SWDs the optimal rate of success in school and high school readiness. Area of focus: Based on the data from the 2018 NYS math and ELA exams, 44% of SWDs are Level 1 in ELA and 46% of this same group are Level 1 in Math. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 5  School leaders will support instruction through comprehensive cycles of professional learning and frequent cycles of teacher observation with feedback resulting in 75% of students with disabilities at a Level 1 proficiency in Math and ELA reaching their individual learning targets in both subjects as measured by I-Ready assessments. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).   Teachers are given item skills analysis reports and NYS ELA and Math score to analyze and plan accordingly.  Cabinet will meet to discuss student progress, analyze Classroom Teachers data and set benchmarks.  Principal will conduct new teacher meetings monthly to discuss goals and student progress.  Principal will conduct all formal and informal observations of un-tenured teachers. All teachers will receive timely feedback and next steps. Inter-visitations will be set up as needed based on Advance data.   Administration will conduct informal and formal observation with a focus on improving timely feedback. The PL plan will be an outgrowth of observation data.  Teachers will provide input on PL options and topics via a survey given in September.  All classrooms are equipped with smart boards which enhance students' Learning Experience and makes differentiated learning much easier because teachers are able to accommodate different learning styles. I-Ready data of student progress is given to teachers on an ongoing basis.  Sept.-Oct. 2018 Administration Sept. 2018-June 2019  Administration will meet with teachers during grade meetings to monitor student progress and set goals.  Teacher Teams will meet weekly to revise lesson and unit maps to reflect differentiation and scaffolding techniques for SpEd and other subgroups. Licensed Sped teachers will be programmed to teach SWDs to meet the needs of the students.  Classroom teachers Sept. 2018 Sept. 2018-June2019 Administration and teachers 7  Administration implemented 2 I-Ready periods per week to increase students' individualized learning targets in both ELA and Math. Students are encouraged to enroll in enrichment activities programmed for small group instruction on Friday and/or Saturday to assist in Math and ELA.  Students and Classroom teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administration  Teachers will be sent to professional learning Teachers opportunities within the district, given by curriculum specialist. Teachers will then turn- key strategies to colleagues.  Teachers will be chosen based on classroom observations to conduct in-house professional learning to colleagues.  Principal will connect with colleagues to set up inter-school visitations for staff to observe best practices.  Teachers are given Professional development on differentiation and scaffolding techniques. November2018-May 2019 Administration Administration Oct.- Nov. 2018 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  PTA meetings will be held at a flexible time to accommodate parents/guardians.  Open school meetings are conducted twice per year to inform parents of student progress on report cards and progress in meeting annual goals on student IEPs.  Parents are invited to attend annual IEP reviews to discuss academic and personal growth needs of student. Translation services are provided as much as possible in these meetings.  Report cards are distributed 3 times per year in grades K-8.  Information regarding periodic assessments and classroom assessments are posted on skedula/Pupilpath to keep parents informed of student progress. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. With guidance from administration through clear and consistent articulation of a common instructional vision, teachers will engage in the development and implementation of CCLS aligned curriculum which include scaffolding techniques and differentiation methods to increase SWDs academic progress during collaborative planning time once a week. Teachers will attend Professional Learning from Specialists and colleagues. 8  Grade meetings and Benchmark meetings will begin in September 2018 and continue till June 2019. Vertical planning teams meet once per month and inquiry teams meet weekly. Testing Coordinator will schedule periodic assessments Data Specialist will prepare data for staff that is comprehensive Administration will support teachers through PL. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, targeted students will reach their mid-year benchmark goals as measured by I-Ready Assessments in math and ELA. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Instrument of measure that will be used in February 2019 to measure progress for the midpoint benchmark will be I-Ready assessment Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2017-2018 School Survey Data Area of Strength: According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, over 90% of families feel well-informed by the communications they receive from their school, teachers work closely with them to meet their child's needs and the school communicates with them in a language and in a way that they can understand. Area of focus: Based on data from 2018 NYS math test, 22% of students tested are on level 1. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Through a comprehensive parent engagement plan for targeted families, 75% of targeted students will meet their individualized benchmarks in mathematics as measured by I-Ready assessments. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan  Targeted general education students that received a level 1 will be encouraged to join the enrichment program in Math offered on Saturday and/or Friday for small group instruction. Students will engage in the academic, arts, sports, and STEM activities.   A parent committee will be formed to select activities  and evaluate the progress of Community schools program. Information regarding periodic assessments and classroom assessments are posted on pupil path to keep parents informed of student progress.  PTA meetings will be held at a flexible time to accommodate parents/guardians  Open school meetings are conducted twice per year to inform parents of student progress.  Report cards are distributed 3 times per year in grades K-8.  Meet the teacher night will be held for parents to come  and become familiar with Common Core Curriculum. School calendar is distributed monthly highlighting important events. Sept. - Oct. 2018 Administration Targeted students, PTA, Classroom Teachers Teachers Oct. 2018 Parents Sept. 2018-June 2019 Sept. 2018  I-Ready assessment results are sent to parents to monitor student academic progress in ELA and MAth. Parents Sept 2018, March 2019 and June 2019 Administration PTA, Classroom Teachers 1    IREADY programs In ELA and Math are available for students to use after school for extra support. Skedula/Pupilpath will keep parents informed of student progress. parents Sept 2018-June 2019  Parents will have access to student attendance, assessment grades and assignment information via Skedula/Pupilpath.  Teachers will be able to outreach to parents through Pupilpath system to discuss classroom issues or events. Administration PTA, Classroom Teachers  Parents are invited to school performance's, dances, and Parents holiday events. Student of the month ceremony held monthly   Our Parent Coordinator has an open door policy  Our Parent Coordinator has implemented parent surveys to increase feedback from parents on school issues. Oct. 2018-June2019 Administration PTA, Classroom Teachers, Parent coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable.  PTA meetings will be held at a flexible time to accommodate parents/guardians.  Open school meetings are conducted twice per year to inform parents of student progress.  Report cards are distributed 3 times per year in grades K-8.  Parents are informed of Students NYS Math and ELA test results  Parents of students that received a level 1 on NYS Math test are encouraged to enroll their child in small  group enrichment program in math offered on Saturday and/or Friday. Information regarding periodic assessments and classroom assessments are posted on skedula/pupilpath to keep parents informed of student progress. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administrative Cabinet will meet weekly to discuss progress Parent Coordinator and PTA will help strengthen parent outreach. Teachers will be expected to provide scaffolding and differentiation for targeted students to ensure progress. Data specialist will keep track of data on targeted students. School Leadership Team will meet monthly discuss attendance issues. 2  Testing Coordinator will schedule periodic assessments and prepare data for staff that is comprehensive Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019, 75% of targeted students will meet their individual mid-year learning benchmark as measured by the IReady assessment in math. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. I-ready Assessment Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) NYS test scores, benchmark assessments Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) IREADY, conferencing, ReadyGenInterventions Small group instruction, one on one tutoring During school day, After school class work , teacher recommendations NYS test scores, benchmark assessments class work , teacher recommendations NYS test scores, benchmark assessments, teacher recommendations NYS test scores, benchmark assessments, teacher recommendations Teacher recommendation Go Math interventions, CMP3 interventions, use of manipulative, Math Blasters Small group instruction, one on one tutoring During school day, After school Student conferencing, hands on activities Small group instruction, one on one tutoring During the school day Student conferencing, DBQ’s Small group instruction, one on one tutoring During the school day Reward system, conflict resolution Small group and one to one During the school day Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) 4  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 0 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. STH population would receive counseling, school supplies, and bus servicing. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). na 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 5  na 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. na 6  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. License information is reviewed for all perspective candidates. Candidates are then asked for demonstration lessons and to show portfolios that provide a clear picture of their educational philosophy. Mentors are assigned for new teachers and teachers who request additional support as needed. Professional development is provided by all teachers and administrators as needed . Grade Leaders chosen based on classroom walk-troughs turn-key professional learning activities as well as lead grade meetings. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Teachers will attend professional learning activities throughout the year. Professional learning will take place in the school building on Mondays as per UFT contract and will be given by Administration as well as Network Specialist. Teachers will also be given the opportunity to attend various workshops out of the school building given by specialist and other notable professionals. Teachers are expected to turnkey important information to the rest of the staff during Professional Learning time, grade meetings, vertical planning sessions, and Inquiry. Teachers will also participate in a book study on aligning the CCLS. The following workshops have been attended by staff members: ● Student engagement ● Datacations/ Skedula ● Differentiation and UDL ● Analyzing data ● Questioning ● Scaffolding/differentiation 7  Teachers have participated in vertical planning monthly. The following were assignments from administration during vertical planning periods: ● Aligning curriculum maps to the common core standards Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. na 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). na Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Pre-k curriculum is aligned to CCLS. Teachers conduct parent orientations to instruct parents on Kindergarten expectations. Pre-K teachers meet with Kindergarten teachers during vertical planning to discuss best practices and align curriculum to CCLS. End of year packets are sent home to parents outlining Kindergarten expectations to help students prepare for the coming year. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Benchmark assessments are given 3-4 times per year in ELA and Math along with monthly check- ups to track student progress. Student data is also gathered through various formative and summative assessments such as conferencing, exit assessments, unit assessments and peer assessment. Teacher Teams meet twice weekly to discuss student work and data. Lesson and unit plans are adjusted as needed to reflect assessment data. In the classroom teachers engage in small group instruction, flexible grouping, and scaffolding strategies. Lessons are data driven and aligned to the CCLS. Students work 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools 8  Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) section 5, 8 section 5 section 5 Section 5, 8 x x x x x Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 494,645.00 108,363.00 14,912.00 0 4,137,788.00 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., 9  semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 0  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. [The Margaret Mead School] , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students [PS 209] will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 1  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary School Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) [PS 209] , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between 3  the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● An Annual Title I Parent Meeting convened October 18, 2016 ,for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 4  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 5  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 6  ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 7  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? The Community School strategy is integrated via three ways: (1) using data tools to improve daily school-day attendance (which improves a student's educational quality), (2) giving free eye exams and glasses to every student that needs them (which improves a student's ability to learn), and (3) giving teachers Professional Development workshops that equip them to better teach to students with a variety of educational needs. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. 1. By June 30th, 2019, we want to give 150 students 90 hours of programming, through the 21st Century funding. It will be measured by the inputting and tracking of student attendance into Youth Services, according to the 21CCLC grant. 2. By June 30th, 2019, we want to bring 20 students into the ‘Not At Risk’ attendance category who were previously Chronically Absent in the 2017-18 school year. It will be measured by the student attendance records of the school, tracked and measured with the New Visions’ Data Sorter, according to the 21CCLC grant. 3. By June 2019, to conduct two student discussions (the first discussion by December 2018) and three parent events with the average attendance of 25. This will be measured by using attendance sheets and inputting the attendance numbers into Youth Services, according to the 21CCLC grant. We want to offer a welcoming place to all families of varying cultures and backgrounds, to hold discussions with our students regarding diversity and multiculturalism, and offer parents culturally specific and diverse events at our school that highlight the different cultures that comprise our neighborhood and school communities. 4. By June 2019, we want to offer every student free eye exams and free dental exams in the 2018-19 school year. This will be measured by attendance sheets which will show which students received the examinations. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? Students participating in the CS program will receive targeted enrichment during ELT. Expanded Learning Time will help to close the achievement gaps and provide opportunities for students to participate in activities that will complete a well rounded education. CS will provide attractive activities such a pottery and dance that will appeal to children and motivate them to attended school. Parents were consulted on the types of activities that would appeal to their children. This strengthened the home -school connection. The implementation of soccer and dance will promote health and wellness and support the in school physical education goals at P.S. 209. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. 8  CBO Partnership Leadership Program Target Population K-8th grade Students before and after school Marquis Studios K- 8th Grade students after school programming Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal By June 30th, 2019, we want to give 150 students 90 hours of programming, through the 21st Century funding. It will be measured by the inputting and tracking of student attendance into Youth Services, according to the 21CCLC grant. By June 30th, 2019, we want to give 150 students 90 hours of programming, through the 21st Century funding. It will be measured by the inputting and tracking of student attendance into Youth Services, according to the 21CCLC grant. Keys to Abundant Life Parents parent culinary classes service 50 parents with programming Global language Project Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment 6th -8th Grade Students professional development offer 5 6-hour professional development workshops Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will use our CBOs (The Leadership Program, Marquis Studios, Keys to Abundant Life, Global Language Project) to give 150 students 90 hours of programming, through the 21st Century funding, by June 30th, 2019. We will use the New Vision's Data Sorter to bring 20 students up from Chronic Absenteeism from the 2017-18 school year to be 'Not At Risk' of Chronic Absenteeism in the 2018-19 school year. 9  We will use collaboration between the Principal, the CSD, and other Community School Team members to design a welcoming place to all families of varying cultures and backgrounds. We want to hold discussions with our students regarding diversity and multiculturalism, as well as offer parents culturally specific and diverse events at our school that highlight the different cultures that comprise our neighborhood and school communities. We want to conduct 2 student discussions by June 2019, with the first by December 2018, and to host 3 parent events by June 2019 where the average attendance is 25 parents. We will use the DOHMH with Warby Parker to offer every student free eye exams and free dental exams in the Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X P/F Set-aside X 21st Century PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. P.S. 209 partnered will the Leadership Program and SLT, and Community Schools director. The Principal will meet weekly with the director to ensure that success of the implementation of the program and to trouble-shoot issues. 0  Principal will meet weekly with the School Cabinet to discuss student progress. Student progress data will be provided to CS Director to help coordinate services effectively and that the students needs are being met. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students The Leadership Program will provide staff that will facilitate activities ranging from soccer, Robotics, Pottery, and dance. The Community school Team consists of the following members: Mrs. Locurcio( Principal), Mr. Tudda ( liasion), Mrs. Dalgin ( Assistant Principal), Mrs. Shah ( Teacher), Ms. Tindal (21st Century), and Ms. Soverall (Director) The Team will meet monthly to discuss progress and success of the program. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. The Community Schools Program was provided to the school through the 21st Century grant that was awarded to P.S. 209 in 2017. The Grant is distributed over a 5 year period, and will provide funding for activities before and after school as well as on Saturday. The Community Schools Program will provide facilitators for their activities and P.S. 209 will also provide teacher s that will provide enrichment. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. The program will begin on October 2018 and run until June 2019. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 1  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Begin description here: 146 of our 704 students (20.7% of our population) are ELLs. Our Title III After school Program meets twice a week, on Wednesday and Thursday afternoons from 2:45-5:15. Instruction for both sessions is provided by ENL-licensed teachers. The program began on Wednesday, October 3, 2018 and will run through June, 2019, for a total of 65 sessions. A supervisor will be hired to oversee the Title III after-school program because there is no other DOE program running in the building at this time. Attendance will be taken and recorded for each session. All letters to parents will be sent in the parents’ preferred languages. 26 of our ELLs have been in our program for more than 3 years. After looking at the RLAT and EDAT, we found that these students scored lower on the Reading and Writing modalities on the NYSESLAT than on the Listening and Speaking modalities. The Title III after-school program will provide more individualized and intensive instruction than can be provided during the school day, focusing on building vocabulary, reading comprehension, and writing strategies. The goal is to engage their interest, boost their confidence, and increase their literacy skills so that they can attain proficiency on the NYSESLAT and perform better in the classroom. There will also be a focus on building fluent conversational skills and answering questions aloud in full, grammatically correct sentences, so students become used to speaking correctly and build their speaking vocabulary. Students will be able to access these skills to help them write, and to edit and revise their writing. Our newcomers can also benefit from this focused instruction. Most of these students arrive with strong literacy skills in their native languages, and have had some exposure to the English language in their home country. Many of them can read and write in English, but do not have the English vocabulary base necessary to understand what they read or to write on grade level. These students will benefit from supplemental instruction in basic English vocabulary and sentence structure, providing an opportunity to build their listening and speaking skills through conversation and practice, so that they can better participate in everyday classroom activities. Home language support is provided through bilingual dictionaries and glossaries, peer translators, and online translating resources. Instruction for all ELLs is designed to address individual areas of need in Listening, Speaking, Reading, and Writing in English. Students receive scaffolded instruction designed to ensure that they receive the support they need in order to succeed in their classes. Planned lessons and activities concentrate on building crucial academic and basic vocabulary, as well as the language skills that ELLs need in order to participate and thrive in the classroom. This instruction will be adjusted when required, as determined by ongoing assessment. Students use laptops and Smart Board activities to offer exposure to language through multicultural sites, support for content through non-fiction sources, and reinforcement of written and spoken language skills. We have listening centers to help build Newcomers’ listening comprehension and language acquisition. These students will also read and perform short plays to promote comprehension and help them become more comfortable with speaking English. 3  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: ENL teachers meet weekly to collaborate, assess, and review students’ needs, as well as to share strategies and ideas. ENL teachers also meet with the classroom teachers for the students whom they service, to offer support and share strategies to enable ELLs to succeed in their classrooms. Teachers attend local PL sessions, DELLSS workshops, and webinars, and turn-key this training for all staff who work with ELLs. This training will take place on Mondays throughout the school year. Agendas and sign-in sheets will be maintained. We plan to have additional high quality training, as it becomes available, that will enhance teacher effectiveness and impact student learning. PL is provided at no cost to the program. Some projected PD and webinar topics include: October: Reading Basics With Newcomers November: Building Academic Language for ELLs December: Teaching Informational Texts to ELLs January: Scaffolding Instruction to Reach All ELL Subgroups Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Our parents along with students participate in an after school cooking class hosted by "Keys To Abundant Life" and funded by the Century 21 Grant. This program takes place on Wednesdays and will begin on October 24,2018 and will run for 14 weeks. We will provide translation and interpretation services as needed. Agendas and sign-in sheets will be maintained. 4 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 5  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 21 School Name The Margaret Mead School Borough Brooklyn School Number 209 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Fran Locurcio Coach NA ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Sandra Geller Teacher/Subject Area Jaclyn Satriana/ ELA Teacher/Subject Area Lori Tieger Related-Service Provider Jaclyn Gluck Superintendent Isabel Dimola Assistant Principal Jennifer Cianciotta Coach NA School Counselor Bernadette Sanders Parent Lily Gacevic Parent Coordinator Fran Devivo Field Support Center Staff Member NA Other (Name and Title) Laurie Goldberg C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 4 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 2 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 731 6 Total number of ELLs 142 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 19.43%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? - Fountas and Pinnell - Grades K-5 - Teacher-created beginning-of-unit pre-assessments based on Ready-Gen curriculum - Grades K-5 - Teacher-created beginning-of-unit pre-assessments based on Codex curriculum - Grades 6-8 - Go Math beginning-of-unit embedded assessments - Grades K-8 - iReady diagnostic tests in ELA and Math – Grades 2-8 Data from formative assessments is examined to gauge students progress and mastery of skills. Teachers analyze data from curriculum-embedded assessments, as they are administered, to determine what skills or topics need to be reviewed or approached differently, what scaffolds would be helpful to which students, and develop lessons accordingly. Our data indicates that while many of our ELLs across the grades are improving in Writing we need to build on this progress and continue to infuse writing into every lesson. The data also reveals that we have some students who scored low in 7  speaking. We must provide opportunities for students to practice speaking in full and ordered sentences using conversational language, as well as academic vocabulary, in group discussions, partner talk, and in the whole class setting. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Classroom and ENL teachers look at students' Fountas and Pinnell levels when planning to ensure that lessons include texts accessible to all ELLs. ELA and Math curriculum pre-assessments are used to group students according to their prior knowledge and levels of ability and understanding. iReady prescribes lessons based on student performance on diagnostic tests, and there are monthly growth checks to assess students' progress. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? - Schoolnet Math Baseline Assessments - October - Schoolnet ELA and Math Benchline Assessments - 2X/year - ELL Periodic Assessments - 4X/year - iReady diagnostic tests - 3X/year - Go Math mid-unit and end-of-unit embedded assessments - Teacher-created mid-unit assessments for Ready-Gen and Codex - Curriculum-embedded end-of -unit performance tasks for Ready-Gen and Codex - Fountas and Pinnell - 3X/year ENL teachers meet regularly to examine the most recent data and assess students' progress. They use this information to plan instruction. June iReady results indicate that ELLs scored below grade level in the domains of vocabulary and comprehension of informational text. Based on this data, teachers of ELLs are using various strategies to build ELLs' academic vocabulary and comprehension in non-fiction texts. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Student performance and progress is tracked by Inquiry. Data is analyzed by classroom teachers and ENL teachers during grade meetings. Teachers discuss which strategies have worked, and collaborate to adjust lessons to address areas of need for ELLs. Teachers provide small group instruction for students who require further assistance, based on the gathered data. Students who still do not demonstrate sufficient progress are referred for pull-out intervention services. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] All classroom teachers provide strong core instruction – Tier 1. Teachers make lessons meaningful and focus on developing language and literacy across the content areas. Student need for Tier 2 supports is based on assessments. Students who score below grade level on Fountas and Pinnell (Grade K-3) and students who receive a score of 2 on the state assessments (Grades 4 and 5) are targeted for Tier 2 support. Teachers provide Tier 2 RtI services through small group instruction for 2 scheduled periods per week. These teachers also administer baseline assessments, and monitor the students via teacher-created curriculum and assessments. Data is monitored and analyzed through a Language Acquisition Lens, keeping in mind the outward similarities between language acquisition and learning disabilities. Targeted supplemental supports are designed and implemented, and progress is monitored over time. We draw on multiple sources of information to assess the student's risk level and determine whether it is due to second language acquisition factors or other learning difficulties. Our school uses several data sources to guide instruction for ELLs within the RtI framework, including Fountas and Pinnell reading levels; iReady; Scantron Math Assessment (grades 4-8); Schoolnet Periodic Assessments; Unit Tests; pre- and post-assessments; continuous informal teacher assessment; culminating activities; writing samples. We examine all data as it becomes available on an ongoing basis and use it to differentiate instruction to meet the needs of our students in real time. Formative assessments allow teachers to make adjustments to instruction, as needed, in order to allow all students to achieve their learning goals. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. 8  - NYSESLAT - State ELA - State Math - iReady 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Teachers have access to or are provided with data from all assessments and meet to discuss the results. We look at students' performance to evaluate their progress and areas of need. We use these findings to determine how various aspects of our program contributed to student success, and how we can adjust other components of our program to support ELLS with strategies and scaffolds in areas in which they struggle. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. On each grade, wherever possible, ELLs of different levels, as well as FELLs who have passed the NYSESLAT within the past 2 years, are grouped together heterogeneously, and placed in classes with non-ELLs. Many of our grades have ICT or self-contained Special Education classes, and our ELL SWDs are placed in those classes according to grade level and IEP specifications. In our Freestanding ENL program ENL teachers go into the classroom 4 periods a week to provide integrated ENL services for every class containing ELLs. Those ELLs who require 360 minutes of ENL instruction receive an additional 180 minutes of stand-alone ENL services from an ENL teacher. b. TBE program. If applicable. While we currently do not have a TBE program at our school, we monitor responses on parent surveys and will open such a class if a sufficient number of parents request it. c. DL program. If applicable. While we currently do not have a DL program at our school, we monitor responses on parent surveys and will open such a class if a sufficient number of parents request it. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? FELLs who passed the NYSESLAT within the past 2 years, requiring 90 minutes of ENL services, and students who scored at the TR or EX levels on the 2015 NYSESLAT, requiring 180 minutes of ENL services, work with the ENL teacher in the classroom 4 periods per week. Students who scored at the EN or EM levels on the 2015 NYSESLAT, requiring 360 minutes of ENL services, work with the ENL teacher for the 4 integrated ENL periods, and are taken out of the classroom for an additional 4 periods per week for 180 minutes of standalone ENL services. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content area instruction is provided in English by the classroom teacher and supported by the ENL teacher. ENL teachers coordinate with the classroom and content area teachers to deliver rigorous instruction that is on grade level and aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards. Teachers design their lessons to provide comprehensible input and employ probing 9  questions to stimulate the students’ interest. Scaffolding techniques and ENL strategies are employed in a systematic and structured way in order to allow access to the material for all ELLs. These techniques include the use of visuals, manipulatives, and vocabulary-building strategies to help make the subject matter comprehensible to all students. Students are engaged in close reading and vocabulary is grade-level, academic, and context-embedded. Modeling, visual tools, TPR, picture libraries, bilingual glossaries, and tabletop whiteboards are all used, as warranted, to ensure that students of all levels will be able to understand and participate in the lesson. ENL teachers, together with the classroom teachers identify students’ language proficiency levels and use this information to plan lessons, differentiate instruction, and assess students’ progress. This information helps classroom teachers understand what their ELLs may be able to do. Teachers examine the domain-specific language demands of the content area units and adjust the way they present and explain academic vocabulary so the ELLs can grasp the concepts and become independent learners. Teachers use materials that are linguistically appropriate, age and grade appropriate, and aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards. Materials are highly visual, use multimedia, and provide supports such as graphic organizers and templates to help organize information for better understanding. ENL teachers and classroom teachers take into account ELLs’ home languages, cultural backgrounds, and native and English language literacy skills in all planning. Students are encouraged to use bilingual dictionaries or glossaries, alternate texts, and online translating sites, and may write responses in their native languages to be translated into English, when appropriate. When possible and appropriate, ELLs may be paired with students who speak the same language to help them understand and be understood. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We do not have any TBE or Dual Language classes so students are not evaluated in their native languages. Native language versions of the Math and Science exams are offered to students for whom their home language version is available. Students who speak languages other than those may be administered an oral translation of the exam. We have bilingual dictionaries and books in various languages available for our ELLs. Students may, when appropriate, write answers for assignments or essays in their native language and translate them together with a staff member who speaks that language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Although we currently do not have any SIFE students at our school, we have an instructional plan in place in the event we do receive any Students with Interrupted Formal Education. Using the RtI framework, we plan to provide these students with the support they require, including at-risk resource and Guidance. We also plan to have ongoing articulation with the parents to help build upon school-related expectations and encourage support at home. All SIFE students would, naturally, be encouraged to participate in our Extended-Day and Title III programs. b. Newcomers to our school arrive with varying levels of literacy abilities in their native languages, as well as in English. Students’ previous knowledge can be used to motivate them and enhance their scholastic abilities with the development of English language learning. Newcomers are aided by peers who speak the same language. Students are encouraged to use bilingual glossaries and other translation devices. Teachers use TPR, visual aids, manipulatives, technology, and alternative texts as a multi-sensory approach to reach all the students. Teachers model correct language structures and provide opportunities to use language for authentic purposes to help develop students’ language skills. Listening centers available in all classrooms allow the ELLs to facilitate development of listening and reading skills. We also have a “Newcomer Kit” available on three levels to supplement the lessons. All ELLs receive content area instruction on grade level through the use of flexible grouping and differentiated instruction. ENL teachers supplement this instruction by modifying tasks according to the abilities of the students. c. Students who have been here 4-6 years are generally proficient in social English and need to improve their academic language comprehension and skills. Lessons are tailored to build on prior knowledge, as well as previously learned vocabulary and skills to encourage academic achievement. Students may also utilize alternate text sets that specifically target the needs of all learners through the use of authentic language so they can be competent in the content areas. Emphasizing content-area vocabulary, ENL teachers engage in whole-part-whole teaching, highlighting “juicy sentences” and employing 0  deconstruct/reconstruct strategies, as per the work of Dr. Lily Wong Fillmore. d. Long-term ELLs require intensive work in academic language and reading and writing skills. Identifying areas of difficulty in these students is crucial to their success. Teachers focus on writing strategies and employ authentic texts and accountable talk, calling attention to content-area vocabulary and figurative language, in order to help students achieve grade-level competence in all subject areas. e. In addition to receiving ELL testing accommodations for two years after scoring Commanding on the NYSESLAT, Former ELLs receive 90 minutes of ENL services provided by a licensed ENL teacher for those same 2 years.. ENL teachers articulate with the classroom teacher to determine what scaffolds would be helpful and provide assistance, as needed, within the classroom setting. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of all classes with ELLs, including ICT and self-contained Special Ed, articulate on a regular basis to coordinate planning and provide instruction on grade level, following the grade-level curriculum. Students utilize all texts on grade level in all the content areas. ENL teachers review the student’s IEP and articulate with the classroom teacher to plan instruction in accordance with their stated goals. Instruction is delivered through the workshop model approach, incorporating independent activities and group work. Instruction is differentiated based on frequent assessment, including the Fountas and Pinnell benchmark assessment, as well as teacher observation and pre- and post-assessments. Any service mandated on the student’s IEP is provided by the school. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELLs with special needs are provided with related services such as Speech, Physical Therapy, Occupational Therapy, and Counseling. Some ELLs receive SETTSS services, while others are in ICT or self-contained Special Ed classes. ENL teachers coordinate their schedules with all other service providers to ensure that students do not miss any of their recommended services. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. We utilize the ELL component in the ReadyGen and Codex programs. In math, the GoMath program has an ELL intervention component, as well. We also focus on word problems to help ELLs decipher the language so they know what the question is asking and what they need to do. In science and social studies, using non-fiction texts, we concentrate on academic vocabulary and provide visual cues, as well as using the deconstruct/reconstruct model. In Social Studies we work closely with the students on document-based activities. Instruction in all the subject areas is designed to be rigorous and on grade level, while incorporating levels of instructional support to provide multiple access points to our students. ELLs may attend our Extended Day and Title III programs. Newcomers use alternate texts, translated texts, bilingual dictionaries, online translators, and other media to help them understand the material. When possible, they may also answer questions and write in their home language to be translated into English, so they can demonstrate comprehension and learn how to express themselves in English. Developing ELLs use Rewordified texts, dictionaries and thesauri, teacher-provided student-friendly definitions of academic vocabulary, and may do online research to further their understanding of the material. Students may also participate in teacher-student conferences, small group tutoring, repeated reading, and interactive writing. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? - Sounds and Symbols – phonics based program - Imagine Learning (contingent on available funding) After examining June iReady results indicating need in the areas of vocabulary and comprehending non-fiction texts, we established two new programs - Word of the Day and weekly Current Events. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No programs or services are being discontinued. 1  11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our ELLs are fully involved with all the same school programs and activities as the rest of the student body. ELLs and non-ELLs are in the same classes and offered all the same opportunities. Any letters or other written information about our programs are translated into parents’ preferred languages. All our students use iReady for ELA and math support and assessment. All students and parents may log on to Pupil Path to check grades and homework, and to communicate with their teachers. ELLs participate in class and grade performances, Chorus, and school clubs, including Book Club, Homework Help, Debate, Student Government, and Green Team. ELLs may attend our Title III after-school program for additional language support. ELLs also participate in the CPC program and the Italian Federation program after school. ELLs are invited to attend the BOKS sports program before school. This program is designed to encourage students to be active, and a good breakfast is provided to help get the day off to a good start. Letters inviting students to these programs are sent home in parents’ preferred languages. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We use the ReadyGen ELA program for Grades K-5, and the CodeX program for Grades 6-8. We use the GoMath program for all grade levels. We use the iReady program for Math and ELA assessment. Our students use Starfall and ABCya , and teachers use BrainPop to support lessons on various topics. ELLs use online translation and may go online to find explanations and further understanding of what is being taught. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is provided through the use of bilingual dictionaries and glossaries, as well as books written in the students’ home languages. New ELLs are buddied with other students who speak the same language to help them understand and participate in the lessons. Students may do online research in their home languages to help them understand the subject matter. Newcomers are encouraged, when appropriate, to write answers or essays in their own languages, and then have help translating them into English. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Our ELLs receive language-based instruction on grade-level that is aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards. We focus on learning standards and build knowledge and literacy skills through non-fiction texts. All ELLs, regardless of proficiency level, receive rigorous instruction on grade-level and have access to all the same grade-level programs as our non-ELLs. Newcomers use age-appropriate resources with alternate texts, translated texts, dictionaries and glossaries, thesauri, online translations, and other scaffolds to make the material accessible. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our building houses only P.S. 209. We do not share the building with any other school. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). When parents register their children they are provided with a packet including activities, reading lists, supply lists, and an overview of the upcoming curriculum. We also hold an orientation for parents of newly enrolled ELLs, as well as individual meetings with parents throughout the year. The school counselor and the SAT social worker are available throughout the year to help ensure newly enrolled ELLs become comfortable with the school, teachers, and fellow students. We have a list of staff members who speak various languages, and they are available to translate when needed. Our Parent Coordinator sends emails and voicemails in parents' preferred languages to encourage parent involvement. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? 2  Italian is offered as a language elective. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Currently, we do not have a Dual Language program at PS 209. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? This year our school was awarded a Community Schools Grant. As part of the grant, the Globlal Language Project provides professional development focusing on language acquisition for ELLs. All staff, teachers and non-pedagogic, are included in these PD sessions. ENL teachers meet monthly with administration, and weekly with each other, to discuss instruction and strategies, accessing online resources and webinars. ENL teachers participate in inquiry and vertical planning with the grades they service, as well as meeting with teachers during their common planning periods. At these sessions, teachers discuss student work, review materials, and share strategies and approaches that are working. ENL strategies and techniques are modeled by the ENL teacher during push-in sessions. ENL teachers attend ENL workshops and turnkey train all staff, including paras, speech teachers, and other service providers. Topics include overview of the NYSESLAT, interpreting test reports, such as the RLAT, the use of strategies such as deconstruct/reconstruct, vocabulary-building strategies, and planning rigorous instruction for ELLs that is on grade-level and aligned with the Common Core standards. Teachers attend Professional Learning sessions, and are offered other professional development activities throughout the year. Common planning sessions, vertical team meetings, and intervisitation within the school allow for collaboration, assessment, and planning. ENL teachers attend workshops on ELL strategies and techniques and turnkey the information to school staff. Websites listing available workshops for ENL teachers are researched and the school supports options to attend. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. We conduct monthly Professional Learning sessions on topics relating to ELLs. All staff is required to attend. Some of the sessions we plan for the year are: September – How ELLs are Identified and Serviced October – How to Help the Newcomer in Your Classroom November – LAP and LTI – Implications for Teachers and Students December – Strategies for Teaching ELLs Vocabulary January - Evaluating ELL Writing Authentically ENL February – ENL Strategies for Word Problems in Math March - Evaluating ELL Responses for Word Problems in Math 3  April – NYSESLAT – What Students Should Expect and How Teachers Can Help May – Differences Between LEP and SWD June – How to Help Encourage ELLs to Continue to Learn English Over the Summer Sessions titles may be adjusted as teachers attend BSFSC study groups or PL workshops and turnkey the information learned there. ENL teachers are also encouraged to attend DELLSS workshops, and use resources found on the DOE Intranet, NYSED, Regional Bilingual Education Center, Fordham University, LIU, or any other relevant webinars or instructional PD sessions available. Sign-in sheets documenting teacher attendance and agendas are kept on file in the main office. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? ENL teachers arrange individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss their children’s progress in language development, results of language proficiency assessments, and areas of need in language development and the content areas. Contact is made by phone, with an interpreter, or by letter in the language requested by the parents. Interpreters, if available, or over-the-phone translation services are provided at these meetings. These meetings are in addition to the mandated parent orientation, PTC conferences, or PTA meetings. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our parent coordinator is available at all times and communicates with parents on a regular basis, whether over the phone, in person, or via email. The parent coordinator answers questions, helps fill out forms, and assists parents with any problems or issues they may have. Parents of ELLs are invited to attend PTA meetings throughout the year which address issues relevant to ELLs. Translators are available for these meetings, as well as for Parent-Teacher Conferences. Parents are invited to attend monthly class performances, Student-of-the-Month ceremonies, and after-school program performances. The school alerts parents as to after-school programs and community resources. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 4 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Frances Locurcio, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 5  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Margaret Mead School School DBN: 21K209 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Fran Locurcio Title Principal Jennifer Cianciotta Assistant Principal Fran Devivo Parent Coordinator Sandra Geller ENL/Bilingual Teacher Lily Gacevic Parent Jaclyn Satriana/ ELA Teacher/Subject Area Jaclyn Gluck/ Speech Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Bernadette Sanders School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Laurie Goldberg Other Pupil Acct Secretary Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 6  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 21 School Name: PS 209 Superintendent: Isabel Dimola The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Laurie Goldberg Secretary Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We send home surveys to all the students asking parents to indicate in which language they would prefer to receive written or oral communication from the school. Information from these surveys, together with parents' responses on the Blue Cards and HLIS completed at registration, is used to create class lists of all the students and their parents' preferred language of communication. These are updated regularly. The RAPL, RPOB, and RHLA also provide information in regards to the language needs of our students and their parents. 7  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Albanian Armenian Amoy Arabic Bengali Chinese Cantonese Georgian Hindi Moldavian Malayalam English Punjabi Russian Slovak Spanish Sudanese Turkish Tadzhik Urdu Ukrainian Uzbek Vietnamese 2 1 0 4 1 68 0 2 1 2 1 818 2 121 0 131 1 6 1 28 11 6 2 0.17 0.08 0 0.33 0.08 5.562 0 0.17 0.08 0.17 0.08 67.66 0.17 10.01 0 10.84 0.08 0.5 0.08 2.32 0.91 0.5 0.17 2 1 1 5 1 64 4 2 1 2 1 816 2 122 2 129 1 5 1 28 11 6 2 0.17 0.08 0.08 0.41 0.08 5.29 0.33 0.17 0.08 0.17 0.08 67.49 0.17 10.09 0.17 10.67 0.08 0.41 0.08 2.32 0.91 0.5 0.17 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 8  Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to Bill of Rights and Responsibilities September ELL Parent Notification letters Letters regarding Medicaid, immunization, lunch payments, etc. September As needed Announcements for Parent-Teacher Conferences Ongoing Announcements for NYS Testing Dates March Letters and notices regarding after-school activities, school performances, school events Ongoing Title III letters Any other letters or documents that come up October As needed Notices via Datacations Ongoing parents. Provided by DOE DOE Intranet template Generated from ATS Translated on Microsoft Office DOE Template and Microsoft translation Microsoft Office DOE Template and Microsoft Office Translated on Microsoft Office or sent with an attachment telling parents to contact the school for over-the-phone interpretation Through Skedula, goes in parents' preferred languages as per ATS 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Initial registration; classroom visitations ongoing Orientation for parents of new ELLs September Parent/Teacher "Meet and Greet" September Parent-Teacher Conferences 4X/year Individual meetings with parents of ELLs Throughout the year provide interpretation service(s)? Bilingual staff members or over-the phone interpretation services Bilingual staff members or over-the phone interpretation services Bilingual staff members or over-the phone interpretation services Bilingual staff members or over-the phone interpretation services Bilingual staff members or over-the phone interpretation services 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of an individual emergency a bilingual staff member will assist with the notification, or, if there is no staff member available who speaks the parent’s language, we will use the over-the-phone interpretation service. 9  If there is a school-wide emergency our school uses Blackboard Connect, which automatically translates any message into all relevant languages and calls each parent in the language noted on ATS. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The LAC turnkeys information about the LTI during a Professional Learning session. The LAC details how we provide language access services to all parents, how important documents and letters need to be translated, and the process for obtaining translation and interpretation services. Staff members are surveyed to identify bilingual speakers, who will be on call when needed to interpret for parents. Staff members are told about the over-the-phone interpretation service, and about the procedure to translate important documents. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Posters and signs in different languages are posted in the lobby and the main office to let parents know about the availability of translation services. Translation information brochures have been distributed and are available at the main entrance and in the main office. Parents are informed of their rights to these services at registration, and this information is also shared with parents at the ELL Parent Orientation, Curriculum Night, Parent-Teacher conferences, and PTA meetings. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We encourage feedback from parents and poll parents at PTA meetings and Parent-Teacher conferences. Annual surveys are conducted asking parents for their opinions in regards to language assistance and their suggestions for improvement. The LAC meets with the LAP team to review feedback and implement adjustments to improve language access services. 0 
