 18K211 School Name: I.S. 211 JOHN WILSON Principal: CAROLYN JAMES   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: John Wilson Intermediate School 211 18K211 331800010211 6 to 8 School Number (DBN): 1001 East 100 th Street, Brooklyn, NY 11236 718-251-4411 718-241-2503 Phone Number: Fax: Carolyn James Cjames3@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Carolyn James Gordon Marshall Veronica Campbell Gordon Marshall Veronica Campbell N/A Liana Wilson District Information Geographical District: 18 Superintendent’s Office Address: Beverly Wilkins Superintendent: 1106 E 95 th Street, Brooklyn, New York 11236 bwilkin@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-566-6008 Phone Number: 718-649-7074 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) MauriciereDeGovia FSC: Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 415 89th Street, Brooklyn, New York 11219 mdegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-759-3952 Phone Number: 718-759-4960 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Carolyn James Marshall Gordon Veronica Campbell Stephanie Telesford Veronica Campbell N/A N/A Nathalie Delince Gillian Alleyne *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ teacher Member/ guidance counselor Member/   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of John Wilson Intermediate School 211 is to provide each student a diverse education in a safe, supportive environment that promotes self-discipline, motivation, and excellence in learning. With the support of strong parent involvement and community partnerships, we create an environment that nurtures the entire child.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. John Wilson Intermediate School 211 is committed to creating an environment that supports all of its students on their educational journey. We believe that every child can and must achieve academically. We will teach and model the values of respect, cooperation and sharing. We are committed to providing a safe and orderly learning environment for all of our stakeholders so that children will learn to respect and cherish the cultural diversity of their community. We are aware that the middle school provides a transitional connection between the elementary school and high school and thus, we will provide a nurturing educationally appropriate environment based on the physical, emotional, social, and intellectual needs of our youngsters. We are dedicated to collaborating with the entire community of learners: our students, (general education, special education and English Language Learners (ELL), teachers, parents, administrators and community to plan educational programs which will provide our students with opportunities to foster academic talents, social skills, self-esteem, sense of citizenship and identification with their community. The goal of the John Wilson community is to assist our children in identifying individual strengths and talents and to train them to use these assets to succeed in their future academic and career goals. With small learning communities, we strive to provide quality, academically rigorous, developmentally appropriate, standards-based instruction through integrated teaching practices that are experiential, child-centered and project-based. An ongoing, teacher driven, professional development program inspires a commitment to learning and ensures a sustainable future for all our students. Through these measures, our children will develop necessary skills to become self-sufficient and contribute responsibly in a global community. Sesame Flyers is our CBO. We work together to provide a nurturing environment for our students. We work together to provide academics (ELA & math) and extra curricular activities such as cooking, dance, basketball, soccer and etc. We ensure that our students are academically and socially enriched. We are committed to supporting our students and ensuring that they are college and career ready. We provide our students with ELA and Math after school program to sharpen their skills and prepare them for the upcoming state exam. Additionally, our students are given the opportunity to participate in the SHSAT (Specialized High School Admission Test) program to prepare them to take and pass the Specialized HS Admission test. Students have the privilege of taking Guitar, Chess, and violin classes after school. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We have ENL, and Special Education students which include, LD (learning Disability) , ED (Emotionally Disturbed) as well as Intellectually Disabled students. Their various needs are met by proving them with Adapted Physical Education, one to one paraprofessionals, small group instruction, specially designed instruction, and pull-in and pull-out services for ENL students. Our Intellectually Disabled students take the NYSAA or the NYS Common Core Exam. Our ENL students take the NYSESLAT. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Based on an in-depth analysis of the School Quality Guide and data files, there was an increase in the overall median adjusted growth percentile for the state English Language Arts and Math exam. In 2013-2014, the median adjusted growth percentile for the state ELA exam was 61.5 and in 2014-2015, the median adjusted growth percentile for the state ELA exam is 68. In 2013-2014, the median adjusted growth percentile for the state Math exam was 55.0 and in 2014-2015, the median adjusted growth percentile for the state Math exam is 66. The most progress was made in ELA. In the 2016-2017 school year, ELA went from 22.3% to 28.3% level 3s and 4s. In the year 2017-2018 school year, 0  ELA & math made progress. ELA went from 17% level 3s and 4s to 34% level 3s and 4s. Math went from 13% level 3s and 4s to 18.5 % level 3s and 4s. The area of focus this year is still Math. We have a 5% gain in level 3s and 4s in math. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 18K211 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 522 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 69 67 13 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 51 52 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 84.0% % Attendance Rate 77.2% % Reduced Lunch 6.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 1.0% 8.6% 1.9% % Black or African American % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.9 0% 5% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 34.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A YES YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 47 47 14 92.7% 4.4% 25.9% 86.8% 1.3% 1.3% 2 26% 6.8 18.6% 96% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the data from the New York State ELA examination, we have the following: Level 1 – 162 students Level 2 –122 students 36% of students are level 1s in ELA and 27% of students are level 2s. 63% of the student population are level 1s and level 2s in ELA. My intended goal is to improve student outcomes in ELA. We have adopted Scholastic Code X and Teacher's College to align the curriculum to the Common Core Learning Standard (CCLS) and the instructional shifts. We utilize unit plans to outline the content to be taught and the goals for the learning outcome. We differentiate instruction for all learners. The students are grouped according to data, skills and assessments. Teachers utilize outside resources to supplement the curriculum to ensure that we provide instruction according to their needs. For example, the teachers utilize Greek and Latin Roots, Flocabulary and Grammar in their opening activity. We pull students out for Lunch N Learns during lunch and teacher menu periods to provide Academic Intervention Services (AIS). The teachers plan during common planning three times a week by subject area during the course of the week to demonstrate coherence across the classroom and grades. Teachers also meet for Weekly Data Meetings where they deconstruct standards, analyze exemplars, analyze student work in order to identify gaps and misconceptions and plan re-teaching strategies. Additionally, during this time teachers analyze student work, create, modify, and reflect on unit plans as well as plan Lesson Studies. The teachers meet by subject area and interdisciplinary teams on Mondays for professional learning to discuss student’s work, reflect upon best practices to monitor, look for gaps in instruction and to adjust their instruction. The instructional shifts are embedded in the Instructional Focus and in the curriculum. The Teacher's College grade level units of study for the 6th, 7th, and 8th grade provide all the teaching points, mini-lessons, conferences, and small group work needed to teach a comprehensive workshop curriculum in opinion/ argument, information, and narrative writing. This curriculum will foster high level thinking by allowing the students to synthesize, criticize, and analyze. Further, this curriculum will allow teachers to build on writing independence and fluency while simultaneously developing and refining strategies for writing across all content areas. Teachers will provide students with a variety of exemplar texts that model writing progression across grades 6-8. In order to 3  monitor and track the progress of our students, the teachers will design assessments throughout the unit to help students exceed the Common Core Learning Standards. All teachers have a copy of the Instructional Focus. Teachers use the Webb’s Depth of Knowledge to create text dependent questions which promotes and fosters rich discussion. Teachers differentiate instruction and tasks to meet the needs of their students. Citing textual evidence from multiple writing sources using grade appropriate text and higher is part of the instructional focus. It is aligned to the instructional shifts and to the Charlotte Danielson Framework. The students are using multiple writing sources which allow them to gain a deeper understanding about the topic. Rich discussions are taken place across the classrooms. Students can then pull information from multiple sources to support their arguments. All teachers have a copy of the Charlotte Danielson Framework for Teaching Rubric. Teachers are receiving professional learning on the Danielson Framework for Teaching Rubric on Mondays. Teachers view videos and are moving toward deprivatizing their classroom. Teachers visit other teachers to observe best practices to implement in their classroom. Currently, we are using a Peer Inter-visitation Form in order to monitor this process. Sixty percent of a teacher’s practice is based upon the Charlotte Danielson Framework for Teaching Rubric. The instructional focus is aligned to instructional shifts and the Danielson Framework. Students are provided with multiple entry points in the lesson (mini lesson, work period and share/ closing) to demonstrate understanding of the lesson’s objective. During the work period, student tasks are differentiated based on the needs of the students. The instruction is scaffolded. Students are asked to Claim It, Cite It and Clarify It. During common planning time which takes place during the week by subject area and professional learning which takes place on Mondays, teachers analyze student’s work to monitor students’ academic progress. Further, teachers make adjustments to instruction and look for gaps in student learning to revise unit and lesson plans to promote higher level of academic achievement and participation. Teachers provide feedback and share best practices during their professional learning. Students are engaged in Close Reading to dig deeper, grapple with and delve into the text. The idea of close reading is for the student to slow down while they are reading in order for them to understand complex text and be able to cite textual evidence. Teachers use videos, graphic organizers, visual aids, audio equipment, and small group instruction to assist students with disabilities, English language learners (ELLs), lowest third, and the rest of our diverse learners. Some teachers use sentence starters. The students are provided with the Webb’s Depth of Knowledge chart to formulate higher order questions. We will address the following based on our School Wide Assessments, Formative and Summative Assessments: Vocabulary Encoding and Decoding Fluency Text Dependent Questions Citing Textual Evidence Writing From Sources Reading comprehension Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 4   To support our school’s Instructional Focus, by June 2019, 75% of students will show growth in citing textual evidence using multiple writing sources as measured by aligned writing rubrics. 5 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Lowest Third September 2018 - June 2019 Master Teacher, Lead Teachers and Administrators Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Scholastic Codex and outside resources such as Engage New York, Ready, Rally Professional Development Activities: Designing Coherent Instruction Questioning and Discussion Techniques Utilizing Assessment in Instruction Utilizing Data to Drive Instruction Adjusting unit/ lesson plans Small Group Instruction, Lunch N Learn, Direct Instruction, Phonics, Scaffolding, Chunking, Modeling, Push In/ Pull Out, Reciprocal teaching, Word Generation, visual aids, graphic organizers Parent Workshops and Seminars, Award Ceremonies, Parent meeting on Tuesdays, Student Performances, Parent Coordinator Outreach Professional Development Activities: Lowest Third, Students with Disabilities, ELLs/ Overage, STH All Parents September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 Master Teacher, Lead Teachers, English Language Learner (ELL) Instructor and Administrators School Leadership Team (SLT), Parent Association (PA), Guidance Counselors, Parent Coordinator and Administration 6 ELA/ Math Workshops Jupiter Ed Workshops Data Workshops Lead Teachers and Professional Learning Team conducting Peer Inter-visitation and providing PD Family, Staff and students Professional Development Activities: Key Elements of Observing Practice The Data Wise Improvement Process September 2018 - June 2019 Administration, support staff, Master Teacher, and Lead Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The Parent Coordinator and Assistant Principal will conduct parent workshops during the school year 2018-2019. Further, teachers will conduct math and ELA workshops in order for parents to assist their children at home. This will be done on a bi-monthly basis. Every Tuesday from 2:40 PM, parents are welcomed in the school during parent engagement Tuesdays. Parents can meet with their child(ren) teachers in order to assist them with rigorous instruction. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Core teachers will receive continued professional learning during congruency and Mondays Professional Learning on looking at student’s work to improve teaching practices and student outcomes. All core teachers will teach 25 periods and utilize menus to collaborate with teachers and conduct small group instruction. Differentiated and specific professional learning twice a week. Lead teachers and Master Teacher to push in to assist subject area teachers with a specific skill and Charlotte Danielson Framework for Teaching Rubric. 7  With the use of Title 1 funding, Academic Intervention Services are available before, after school and on Saturdays. Teachers will conduct a Close Reading 2 times a week. ELA, Social Studies and Science teachers will implement Socratic Seminars 2 times a month. DRP Running Records Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E X 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 80% of teachers will use an array of assessment tools to determine strengths and needs and teachers will chart student progress. Teachers will use the data to make adjustments in their instruction. Also, they use the data to pull students out during their menus and plan for AIS Fridays. We will use the following to demonstrate progress toward meeting our goal: School Wide Monthly Assessment (rubrics), Teacher Assessment Notebook, Formative and Summative Assessment (rubrics), Unit Plan Assessment (rubrics), Conferencing (rubrics) and Portfolio Assessment (rubrics). We will evaluate mid-point progress by February 2019. We will use analyze student's work and benchmarks as measured by aligned rubrics to determine student progress. Further, we will analyze Interim Assessments and discuss the results in our weekly data meetings. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) School-wide Benchmark assessment rubrics/ unit assessments (rubrics) will be used to measure progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based on the data from the New York State math examination we have the following: Level 1 – 242 students Level 2 –102 students 54% of students are level 1s and 22% are level 2s in math. 77% of the student population is made up of level 1s and level 2s in math. My intended outcome is to improve student outcomes in math. We have chosen to adopt Go Math but with the always changing needs of our unique population we are supplementing Go Math with Eureka Math, and The Connected Mathematics Project (CMP3) to support the needs of our students. Go Math is aligned to the Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Go Math is rigorous and it incorporates the mathematical practices and the instructional focus. Go Math promotes multiple entry points for all students. Teachers differentiate instruction for all learners such as English language learners (ELLs), students with disabilities (SWDs), lowest third, on level, below level and advanced learners. Go Math provides students with strong conceptual understanding of grade-level concepts. Student discourse is an essential component of the curriculum and each unit explores multiple standards and big ideas. CMP3 has job embedded assessments to monitor and track student progress. The Eureka Math curriculum provides students with strong foundational background knowledge for grade-level concepts. Eureka Math provides the students with opportunities to practice basic skills and to apply different strategies to strengthen fluency. Further, Go Math and CMP3 provide the teachers with a wide variety of resources to meet the students’ needs and abilities. We use Eureka Math to bridge the gap between CMP3 and Go Math. GO Math modules are used for additional application and conceptual knowledge. Further, GO Math resources allow for enrichment and reinforcement of the standards throughout the year. Go Math curriculum provides teachers with end of unit tasks and assessments that allow all students to apply what they have learned to real world comprehensive assignments. Each task uses a 4 point rubric to evaluate students’ work and understanding. Students are given the criteria and procedures to ensure that they understand the expectations of the task. Unit tasks are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standard (CCLS) of the unit and incorporate mathematical practices that increase the ability of the students to succeed in future units. Throughout each unit lower performing students are provided with scaffolded assignments that further support their success and completion of the unit tasks. This supportive structure allows lower level students to access the major work of the unit in a clear and coherent manner. At the end of each task, students are encouraged to reflect on their progress. This allows both teachers and students to enter the next unit better prepared. The goal of each Common Core aligned task is to assess and monitor student progress while improving performance on CCLS aligned unit assessments. We will focus on the following needs of our students: 9  ● Vocabulary ● Foundational knowledge ● Computational skills ● Conceptual knowledge Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 50% of our students performing on levels 1 and 2 will show growth on Mathematical Practice 4 (MP4) construct viable arguments and critique the reasoning of others by using Webb's Depth of Knowledge where students will be engaged in formulating hypotheses, making connections, or challenging previously held views during classroom discussions as measured by aligned math task rubrics. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Connected Mathematics Project 3 (CMP3), Eureka Math, Carnegie, Go Math, and other sources such as Big Ideas Math, Progress NY, Ready, and Rally Lowest third September 2018 - June 2019 Lead Teachers, Teachers and Administrators Small Group Instruction, Lunch N Learns, Direct Instruction, Frayer model, Scaffolding, Modeling, Push In/ Pull Out, visual aids, graphic organizers, manipulatives SWDs, ELLs, Lowest Third September 2018 - June 2019 Lead Teachers, Teachers and Administrators Parent Workshops and Seminars, Award Ceremonies, Parent meeting on Tuesdays, Student Performances, Parent Coordinator Outreach All Parents Professional Development Activities: September 2018 - June 2019 Lead Teachers, Teachers , Parent Coordinator and Administrators School Leadership Team ELA/ Math Workshops Jupiter Ed Workshops Data Workshops IEP Workshops Computer Workshops Lead Teachers and Professional Learning Team conducting Peer Inter-visitations and providing professional learning Students and Parents September 2018 - June 2019 Guidance Counselors, Deans, Teachers, Parent Coordinator and Administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 1  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. In the school year 2018-2019, 95% of teachers will log on to Jupiter ed on a weekly basis to inform the parents about their children's progress in school. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Core teachers will receive continued professional learning during Mondays Professional Learning on classroom management. Differentiated and specific professional learning three times a week. Lead teachers, Master Teacher and teachers receive professional learning focusing on looking at student’s work. With the use of Title 1 funding, Academic Intervention Services are available before, after school and on Saturdays. Teachers will conduct a Close Reading 2 times a week. Lead teachers, Master Teacher and teachers will conduct Lunch-n-Learns and pull-outs Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By June 2019, teachers will use an array of assessment tools to determine strengths and needs and teachers will chart student progress. By February 2019, teachers will administer a mid year School Wide Benchmark that will assess the students ability to make connections, and demonstrate their understanding of skills and strategies reinforced in class. Student progress will be charted. We will use the following to demonstrate progress toward our goal: School Wide Monthly Assessments, Teacher Assessment Notebook, formative and summative assessments, unit plan assessments, conferencing, portfolio assessments. 2  We will discuss the mid-point progress in February 2019. We will discuss refining teaching practices and student progress by using the Danielson Framework Rubric. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School-wide Interim Assessment will be used to monitor and track student progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the Quality Review from 2014-2015, while prioritized professional collaborations provide a forum for teachers and teams to gather and analyze student data, strengthen pedagogy, and make key instructional decisions the intended impact on student learning is not yet realized across the school. The most progress was made in ELA. In the 2016-2017 school year, ELA went from 22.3% to 28.3% level 3s and 4s. In the year 2017-2018 school year, ELA & math made progress. ELA went from 17% level 3s and 4s to 34% level 3s and 4s. Math went from 13% level 3s and 4s to 18.5 % level 3s and 4s. The area of focus this year is still Math. We have a 5% gain in level 3s and 4s in math. Currently, 70% of the student population is performing at levels 1 & 2 in ELA and 75% of the student population is performing at levels 1 & 2 in math. The Teacher Teams meet 2 or 3 times a week and they are engaged in professional learning vertically and horizontally. During the professional learning time, teachers adjust unit plans to improve student outcomes for all diverse learners. In the unit plans, they discuss strategies and techniques to improve student outcomes for advanced level, on level, below level, lowest third, SWDs, ELLs, SIFE and etc. All teachers are responsible for meeting the needs of the students. The Teacher Teams share and analyze student work to refine and make adjustments to their unit plans and instruction. The Teacher Teams share best practices across disciplines. Teachers are no longer an island. They are all stakeholders in the academic achievement of their students. They realize that they are all in this together. The Teacher Teams utilize protocols such as the Final Word, Save the Last Word, SLICE and etc. to look at student’s work to improve unit plans, lesson plans, assessment, curriculum and instruction. The unit plans are adjusted daily based on whether or not the students met the objective. Teachers will revisit the units and lesson. The pacing of the unit plan gets adjusted based on the assessments to improve student outcomes and teacher practice. Teachers are learning to teach in multiple ways based on the unit plans. After analyzing student's work and classroom data, teacher teams meet to prepare a lesson study based on a needs assessment. Based on the lesson study from the unit, teachers will determine what strategies work and what strategies did not work in order to revise and make adjustments to the unit. Teachers are currently making adjustments to their units by discussing and conferencing with their students during the work period. Teachers determine whether or not strategies/standards need to be re-taught. Teachers re-word questions using Webb’s Depth of Knowledge (DOK) to scaffold, teach the topic or the skill in a new way. Teachers also remove/adjust the final task because of time constraints, individual needs of the student or because the student does 4  not have access to the resources. Teachers also make adjustments to the vocabulary portion of the unit by introducing new techniques for students to learn and retain vocabulary. Bases on the lessons from the unit plan, teachers are focusing on the following needs: Vocabulary strategies Reading Comprehension strategies Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teacher teams will work collaboratively to adjust 90% of unit plans to demonstrate vertical and grade alignment with Universal Design for Learning supports for SWDs, lowest thirds, ELLs within the 4 subject areas (social studies, science, ELA, & Math) as measured by growth on aligned Common Core social studies, science, English Language Arts, and math unit assessment rubrics. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional Learning (Mondays), weekly common planning, vertical and horizontal professional learning All Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Text-dependent questions, graphic organizers, differentiation of instruction, one to conferencing, small group instruction, visual aids, modeling All Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Progress Report, Parent Workshops, award ceremonies, Parent Coordinator outreach, weekly parent meetings Parents September 2018-June 2019 Progress Report, Parent Workshops, award ceremonies, Parent Coordinator outreach, weekly parent meetings, professional learning and teacher team meetings Parents, students and staff September 2018-June 2019 Master Teacher, Lead Teachers, and Administrators Professional Learning Team Lead Teachers, Master teacher and Administrators Professional Learning Team Administrators, Parent Coordinator and other support staff Administrators, Parent Coordinator and other support staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In the school year 2018-2019, parents will have a username and password to their children's account to monitor and track student's progress on Jupiter Ed to support their children with their academics. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Core teachers will receive continued professional learning during congruency and Mondays Professional Learning on looking at student’s work to improve teaching practices and student outcomes. 6  All core teachers will teach 25 periods and utilize menus to collaborate with teachers and conduct small group instruction. Differentiated and specific professional learning three times a week. Lead teachers and Master Teacher will push in to assist subject area teachers with a specific skill and Charlotte Danielson Framework for Teaching Rubric. Teachers will conduct a Close Reading 2 times a week. ELA, Social Studies and Science teachers will implement Socratic Seminar 2 times a month. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By, February 2019, teachers will review the Interim Assessments collaboratively consisted of the following: multiple choice, short responses and/ or extended responses, constructed response as measured by aligned CCLS reading, writing and math rubrics to monitor and track progress. Further, teachers will analyze the data collaboratively to adjust unit plans daily. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School-wide Interim Assessments (multiple choice (rubrics), short response and extended response rubrics and teachers collaborating to adjust unit plans. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the MOTP, 40% of the teachers are effective in 3b: Questioning and Discussion Techniques in the Danielson Framework. Teacher teams meet 2 to 3 times a week to discuss the implementation of Charlotte Danielson Framework, CCLS and the instructional shifts by subject area. The teacher lessons are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. The teacher teams discuss “Peer Inter-visitations” and share best practices. The teams ensure that the instructional shifts are embedded in the curriculum and in teaching. The teacher teams provide professional learning on the Charlotte Danielson Framework for Teaching Rubric. The teacher teams share and analyze student’s work to refine and make adjustments to their instruction and share best practices across disciplines by deprivatizing. Teachers are no longer an island. They are all stakeholders in the academic achievement of their students. They realize that they are all in this together. We have a Master Teacher to assist teachers in their craft. The Master Teacher pushes into their colleagues’ classroom to offer them relevant, timely and actionable feedback about their practice and on the Danielson Framework Rubric. They model and critique lessons on the Danielson Framework. On Mondays, the professional learning team provide differentiated learning on the Charlotte Danielson Framework focusing on 3b: Questioning and Discussion Techniques to promote a deeper understanding by engaging one another in inquiry. Further, the teacher teams are receiving and providing professional learning on the Socratic Seminar to improve 3b: Questioning and Discussion Techniques and 3c: Engaging Students in Learning in the Danielson Framework. Teachers are also receiving professional learning on 1e: Planning and Preparation to ensure teachers are creating instructional designs that include clear expectations, differentiated instruction, and promotes critical thinking. We have a professional learning team that encompasses all subject areas and diverse learners. This team shares best practices and lead his or her subject area groups. This demonstrates that they are an integral part of the school and that their strategies and expertise are needed to move the school forward. This makes the teachers feel empowered and this demonstrates distributive leadership and deprivatization. Based on the MOTP, we will focus on the following: ● Questioning and discussion techniques ● Text dependent questions ● Analyzing student’s work to drive instruction ● Analyzing assessments to improve teacher practice and student outcomes 8  ● Deprivatizing teacher practice ● Differentiate professional learning to improve teacher practice Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Based on the 2017-2018 MOTP results, only 50% of the teachers were effective in 3B. By June 2019, 80% of teachers will be effective in 3b: Questioning and Discussion Techniques in the Danielson Framework as measured by Advance (MOTP), this will be the result of teachers leading professional learning. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Danielson Framework, Questioning and Discussion Techniques, Text Dependent Questions, Reciprocal Teaching, Japanese Study, Webb’s DOK All teachers September 2018-June 2019 Graphic Organizers, Text Dependent Questions, Webb’s DOK All teachers Parent Workshops, Parent Coordinator Outreach, Parent Classes All parents September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Professional Learning Team, Lead Teachers, Master Teacher and Administrators Professional Learning Team, Lead Teachers, Master Teacher, and Administrators Professional Learning Team, Lead Teacher, Master Teacher, Parent Coordinators, Guidance Counselors, PA and Administrators Computer Workshops Special Needs Workshops Building Community Workshops ELL Workshops Attendance Workshops Life Net for Crisis Workshops High School Articulation Workshops Teacher Parent Workshops Teachers and Parents September 2018-June 2019 Professional Learning Team, Lead Teachers, Master Teacher, Parent Coordinators, Guidance Counselors, PA and Administrators 0  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In the school year 2018-2019, there will be monthly meetings to discuss parent leadership and engagement to assist parents in helping their children at home. Mr. Okorafor, the assistant principal will be responsible for implemenation and oversight along with Guy Williams, the parent coordinator. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Core teachers will receive continued professional learning during congruency and Mondays Professional Learning on looking at student’s work to improve teaching practices and student outcomes. All core teachers will teach 25 periods and utilize menus to collaborate with teachers and conduct small group instruction. Differentiated and specific professional learning twice a week. Lead teachers and Master Teacher will push in to assist subject area teachers with a specific skill and Charlotte Danielson Framework for Teaching Rubric. Teachers will conduct a Close Reading 2 times a week. ELA, Social Studies and Science teachers will implement Socratic Seminar 2 times a month. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By, February 2019, teachers’ progress will be monitored as measured by Advance Observations (informal and formal) (MOTP), Instructional Rounds and informal classroom observations. Lead Teachers and Master Teachers will observe teacher practice and provide immediate timely feedback utilizing Danielson Framework Rubric. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 1  Advance Observations (informal and formal), Instructional Rounds (rubric) and classroom intervisitations. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In the year 2015-2016, less than 5% of the parent population attended PA Meetings or AP Workshops. Based on the Quality Review 2014-2015, parents have a fundamental understanding of the integration and connection of the Common Core Learning Standards to college and career readiness. Teachers convey high expectations via goal-setting and detailed feedback to students. The Parent Association has monthly meetings as well as a website and a newsletter. There are monthly School Leadership Team Meetings. We send out monthly progress reports as well as report cards, quarterly. Teachers communicate with parents on Tuesdays to discuss the curriculum and the progress of their students. The Assistant Principal provides monthly workshops to discuss curriculum, instruction, assessments, and etc. The Parent Coordinator, deans and guidance counselors meet with parents to discuss college and career opportunities. The parent coordinator regularly e-mails parents about the happenings in the school. Parents also e-mail the parent coordinator with any concerns they might have and the parent coordinator directs those concerns to the principal. We have an open door policy where parents are free to discuss any issues and meet with staff, at the parent’s convenience. We have a staff and parent handbook which outlines expectations for staff, parents, students and teachers. We have monthly assemblies to discuss College and Career Readiness, as well as other topics, such as safety, bullying, etc. We have guest speakers from various agencies helping to implement the assemblies’ theme. We are preparing Student Government Elections. We send out monthly calendars outlining important dates and events which are to take place. We have an Electronic Billboard with reminders of upcoming events, meetings, etc. We send out notices regarding school issues. Vision and immunization requirements are shared with families. Students participate in the Fitness gram and assessment of physical abilities. We have award ceremonies for Student of the Month, Most Improved and for Perfect Attendance. We have a senior committee as well as a trip coordinator. We have boys and girls basketball and track teams, steppers and a cheerleading squad. We have fundraisers for Breast Cancer, Step Team and basketball teams. Students, parents and staff participated in the cancer walk and raised $1,054.00, with their goal being $1000.00. This year we hope to raise $1,000. We have monthly campaigns which address the socio-emotional needs of the community. We have a coat drive, Box Tops for Education drive as well as food baskets for families at Thanksgiving and Secret Santa for students in our school who are in need. 3  We will address the following to increase parental involvement:  Parent Volunteers  Parent Engagement Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 5% increase in parent involvement in the school evidenced by agendas and sign in sheets from monthly PA meetings and monthly AP Workshops. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Monthly AP Workshops on CCSS, assessment, curriculum, instruction, etc., Parent Coordinator and Guidance Counselor Workshops on College and Career Readiness, Teacher Outreach on Tuesdays, Parent Coordinator Outreach, School Leadership Team Guidance Counselor outreach All Parents September 2018-June 2019 Lead Teachers, Master Teacher, Administrators, Professional Tile 1 Workshops to support SWDS, ELLS and other subgroups, Translators, Handbooks in various languages Parents Learning Team Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator September 2018-June 2019 Lead Teachers, Master Teacher, Administrators, Professional Learning Team Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator Calendars, notices, parent newsletter, SLT committee, School Website, Staff , Parent and Student Handbook, Tuesday Parent Contact Day, Robocall, Sonar Cloud , Open Door Policy, Report Cards, Monthly Progress Reports, Open School, Workshops on curriculum and instruction, Guest Speakers: Safety Parents September 2018-June 2019 Lead Teachers, Master Teacher, Administrators, Professional Immediate Response to parent and community issues, Assemblies , Workshops, Open Door Policy, Bereavement Group, Dances Basketball and Track Teams, Step Team, Monthly fund raisers involving socio-emotional themes – Breast Cancer Walk, Coat Drive and Secret Santa Parents, students and staff September 2018-June 2019 Learning Team Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator Lead Teachers, Master Teacher, Administrators, Professional Learning Team Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator 5  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. In the school year 2018-2019, we will partner with Sesame Flyers and Midori & Friends. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Dances and basketball tournaments are held before and after school hours so that there need not be any schedule adjustments for these activities. Assemblies, workshops, bereavement group, and fund-raising are all conducted during school hours and during staff lunch or menu periods. Teachers will be used to monitor student activities before after school. The guidance counselors will use pamphlets deemed necessary Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will use monthly sign-in sheets from PA meetings and AP Workshops to evaluate the 5% increase of parent involvement. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Monthly sign-in sheets from PA meetings and workshops. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Lowest Third, level 1s and level 2s Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) ● Wilson Reading Program assists special education students in decoding and encoding. ● Winter Institute is a test prep course that prepares the 6 th -8 th grade students for the ELA. ● Small group instruction is provided in balanced literacy workshop ● One-to-one instruction is provided for students during conferencing in the Scholastic Code X. ● Lead teachers and Master Teacher push in to classrooms working with smaller groups of students identified by teachers, data, guidance and support staff as being in need. This reduces the ratio of teachers to students. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Wilson is done in small groups. ● The Winter Institute delivery of service is small group instruction. ● Scholastic Code X Workshop services are provided in small groups. ● One to one instruction is provided during Balanced Literacy. ● Push In Services delivered in small groups ● Special Needs Tutorial is delivered in small groups. ● 90 block with flexible grouping. Students are in differentiated groups. ● Lunch N Learns are delivered in small groups. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) ● Wilson is provided during and after school. ● The Winter Institute is provided during the February break for three days. ● Scholastic Code X Balanced Literacy Model is provided during the work period. ● One to one instruction is provided during the school day and after school. ● Push in Services are provided during the school day. ● Special Needs Tutorial is provided after school. ● 90 block flexible grouping is provided during school. ● Lunch N Learns are provided during the school day. 7  Mathematics Lowest third, level 1 and level 2 students ● A SETSS teacher pushes into classes with students with I.E.P’s to work closely with those students and reduce the ratio of teacher to student. ● Special Needs Tutorial is provided by special education teachers to assist special education students with literacy. ● A block of 90 minutes is provided during the school day to increase student’s time on task and to allow for differentiated instruction and flexible grouping based on student assessments including standardized test data, item skills analysis, teacher conferences and teacher observation and portfolios. ● Lunch N Learns are provided for students during the school day to prepare the students for the ELA exam. This assists in reducing the ratio of teacher to student for more tailored instruction ● Winter Institute is a test prep course that prepares the 6 th -8 th grade students for the Math. ● The Winter Institute delivery of service is small group instruction. ● The Winter Institute is provided during the February break for three days. ● CMP3 Balanced Math Model is 8  ● CMP3 services are provided in small groups. ● One to one instruction is provided during Balanced Math. provided during the work period. ● One to one instruction is provided during the school day and after school. ● Push In Services delivered in small groups ● Push in Services are provided during the school day. ● Special Needs Tutorial is delivered in small groups. ● Special Needs Tutorial is provided after school. ● 90 block with flexible grouping. Students are in differentiated groups. Lunch N Learns are delivered in small groups. ● 90 block flexible grouping is provided during school. ● Lunch N Learns are provided during the school day. ● Small group instruction is provided in balanced math workshop ● One-to-one instruction is provided for students during conferencing in the Scholastic Code X. ● Lead teachers and Master Teacher push in to classrooms working with smaller groups of students identified by teachers, data, guidance and support staff as being in need. This reduces the ratio of teachers to students. ● Special Needs Tutorial is provided by special education teachers to assist special education students with literacy. ● A block of 90 minutes is provided during the school day to increase student’s time on task and to allow for differentiated instruction and flexible grouping based on student assessments including standardized test data, item skills analysis, teacher conferences and teacher observation and portfolios. 9  Science Lowest third, level 1 and level 2 students Students need assistance in citing textual evidence to support an analysis of what the text says explicitly. Students need to follow precisely multistep procedures when carrying out procedures. Social Studies Lowest third, level 1 and level 2 students Students have to cite textual evidence to support analysis of primary and secondary sources. ● Lunch N Learns are provided for students during the school day to prepare the students for the Mathexam. This assists in reducing the ratio of teacher to student for more tailored instruction ● Extended block of science instruction will allow for more time on task and flexible grouping for differentiated instruction in the science content with a focus on content literacy strategies and supports for identified students in need. • Computer teacher pushes into classrooms to help special education students use the software, Inspiration, to organize science Exit Projects. ● During school Exit Project tutorial for grade 8 students. ● Exit Project Program assists students in completing their exit projects after school. ● Lunch N Learns Small Group Instruction ● Extended block is delivered in small groups. ● Extended block is provided during the school day. ● Computer teacher push into small groups. ● Exit Project tutorial delivered in small groups. ● Computer Teacher push is delivered during the school day. ● Exit Project Tutorial is provided during the school day and after school. ● Exit Project Program is provided during and after school. ● Lunch N Learn and Small Group are provided during school and after school. ● Extended block is provided during the school day. ● Computer Teacher push is delivered during the school day. ● Exit Project Tutorial is provided during the school day and after school. 0  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Lowest third, level 1 and level 2 students Students need to build confidence and competence as learners. Students need to be aware of college and career readiness. Students need to be prepared for the world of work and their future. Students need assistance in high school articulation. ● One to one conferences are delivered individual. ● One to one conferences are delivered individual. ● Small group conferences are delivered in small groups. ● Small group conferences are delivered in small groups. ● The Girls Club is delivered in small groups. ● The Girls Club is delivered in small groups. ● SAPIS Group is delivered in small groups and one to one. ● SAPIS Group is delivered in small groups and one to one. ● SAPIS Group is provided during the school day. ● One to one conferences are provided for students during the day to discuss social skills, positive self- image and promoting self-esteem. These services are provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist and Social Worker. ● Small group conferences are provided for the students during the school day to discuss behavior management techniques and strategies. ● The Girls Club is provided for girls to discuss issues relevant to today’s adolescent this occurs during and after school. ● SAPIS -Evaluate and assess students to evaluate them for further services during the school day. One to one conferences with students to evaluate them for services during the school day. ● Teachers observe, evaluate and assess students to make recommendations to doctors and parents, SBST Team during conferencing 1  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 50 students We are planning to provide AIS, After school services, Saturday Academy services, Parent Workshops, Differentiation and etc. We will provide the students with school supplies, books, coats, Backpacks, groceries, toiletries and uniforms if needed to ensure that the students are successful. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 3  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. The Professional Development Team, Lead Teachers, Master Teacher, MSQI Coach and UFT Center will provide Professional Learning to teachers. The Administrative staff will provide support by providing feedback from the 4 to 6 Charlotte Danielson Framework for Teaching Rubric. Administrators will contact the DOE to recruit highly effective teachers. Further, we will recruit teachers from Teacher Fellows Program and Teach America. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). The Professional Development Team, Lead Teachers, Master Teacher, MSQI Coach and UFT Center will provide Professional Learning to teachers. The Administrative staff will provide support by providing feedback from the 4 to 6 Charlotte Danielson Framework for Teaching Rubric. Administrators will contact the DOE to recruit highly effective teachers. Further, we will recruit teachers from the Teacher Fellows Program and Teach America. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 4  3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The teachers in conjunction with the Lead Teachers and Master Teacher during teacher planning create the formative and monthly assessments. These teachers during common planning time discuss student’s work to make adjustments in their instruction. Further, they monitor and look for gaps in student’s work to improve student outcomes. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E & 6 Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 369,119 X 5  Title II, Part A Federal Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 0 0 0 3,665,655.00 X X 5A, 5B, 5C, 5E, & 6 4, 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E, 6 & 7 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and 6  achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 7  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. John Wilson Intermediate School 211, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students John Wilson Intermediate School 211 will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 8  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 9  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. Providing parent workshops on CCLS in ELA and math. Providing parent workshops on progress reports such as Jupiter Ed. Providing parent workshops on Special Education resources. Providing parent workshops on ELL resources. Providing parent workshops on Attendance. Providing parent workshops on how to use technology 0  School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) John Wilson Intermediate School 211 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; 1  ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; 2  ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  Demonstrate a positive attitude at home about school, teachers, and the importance of education  Keep open communication with my child's teacher, coordinator and the Principal, communicating any concerns they may have. This helps to address any difficulties, and maintains a positive learning and social environment.  Monitor homework and assignments to make sure they are completed well and on time, and encourage my child to work to the best of their potential, academically and socially.  Provide to the best of my ability, proper rest and nutrition for my child, as these are extremely important to function well at school.  Discuss the effects of bullying, to include cyberbullying, and keep the lines of communication open to ensure my child isn't the victim or perpetrator of bullying.  monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games;     promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;   participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;   become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child;   III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities: 3  ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 4  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 5  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 4 1 3 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Title III funds will be used for 2 distinct small group after-school programs, both of which will utilize computer technology. Previously, performance of our ELLs on the NYS Science and NYS Social Studies Exams was below their performance on the NYS ELA and NYS Math Exams. The NYS Social Studies exam is no longer administered. This past year, our ELLs performance on the NYS Science Exam was at or above, the rest of the school population. Many took the exam in their native language. Most ELLs do not have the foundation in American history needed for Grades 7 and 8 Social Studies. In general, one of the most misunderstood assignments students must complete is that of a research paper. Most don’t know where or how to begin. We hope to maintain the NYS Science Exam scores, and scaffold knowledge needed to complete NYS Middle School Social Studies and Science curriculum, by working with the students on their Science and Social Studies research/Exit projects. This past year, the biggest complaint from teachers about their students’ research papers, was that they were taken from the web verbatim, in other words, plagiarized. Since students in all grades must complete some type of research project, we will teach ALL of our ELLs how to collect information from a variety of sources in order to choose a topic that interests them. They will learn how to do a web search, gather information from the web and make folders, and record entries using Microsoft, Mac Word and Pages. They will learn strategies for using technology to collect and discover facts and details about topics of interest. Search engines that are geared to middle school students and ELLs (i.e., Babblefish.com and Google Translator.com translate Word documents into other languages) will be introduced. Students will learn the advantages of bookmarking sites, as well as how to cut and paste URL’s. “Microsoft Word”, “Mac Word” and “Pages” will be used to teach them word-processing skills. The contents and formats of bibliographies will be stressed. In addition, students will learn how to make a Power Point presentation, which is a requirement of their Science and Social Studies research projects. Differentiated instruction, using “Sheltered English,” will allow newcomers to learn how to recognize letters of the alphabet, then words, and enable them to read and comprehend sentences, paragraphs and stories, sooner than Ells who are learning English without computer technology. Students will be allowed to use the “Speech Recognition” mode for commands and dictation. Using computers enhances the use of instructional scaffolding. In addition to the Mac Books previously purchased, we will buy 2 Mac Book Pro Laptops for sole use by the ELLs in the Title III After School Program. Miriam Acosta-Sing states in “Laptop Use and Impact in the Context of Changing Home and School Access” that the benefits of student computing reach far into a child’s future as students can collaborate more and improve their writing, as well as their 6  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information presentation skills, when technology is present The students’ newly acquired computer and research skills will help make their projects more meaningful and manageable. High quality differentiated instruction is the key to meet the needs of the English Language Learners. Students in classes that engage in differentiated instruction, achieve better outcomes than students in classrooms without differentiation. (Csikszentmihalyi, Rathunde, & Whalen, 1993; Tomlinson, Brighton, Hertberg, Callahan, Moon, Brimijoin, et al., 2003) In 1995, the Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development stated that “considerable evidence support the conclusion that the differences in achievement between students of mainstream and non-mainstream backgrounds are not the result of differences in the ability to learn, but rather of differences in the quality of instruction they have received in school.” “Teachers see more confidence in students’ computer skills and increases in quality of work.” In 1996, Lahm concluded that the effectiveness of computer instruction is attributed to the higher interaction required for responses and active learning. Using computers affords teachers the opportunity to utilize instructional scaffolding. This includes modeling, bridging, contextualization, schema building, metacognitive development and text re-presentation. Classes will begin the middle of October and end in the middle of June. Students in Grades 6 and 7 will meet for 26 sessions on Mondays from 4:00 P.M.-6:00 P.M. All classes will be taught by the NYS certified ESL teacher. A trained technology teacher will co-teach for 5/ 1-hour sessions of parent/student technology workshops. A QTEL trained, licensed NYS certified Science teacher will co-teach 4/ 1hour sessions of very small group work to research and write final science projects with students. A licensed NYS Social Studies teacher will co-teach 4/ 1 hour sessions of very small group work to research and write various Social Studies research projects. Students in Grade 8 will meet for 26 sessions on Wednesdays from 2:45 P.M.-5:45 P.M. All classes will be taught by the NYS certified ESL teacher. A technology teacher will co-teach for 5/ 1hour sessions when we have our parent/student technology workshops. After learning the how-to’s of basic researching, we will pay particular attention to the rubrics for the written, oral, graphic and Power Point components of the Grade 8 Science and Social Studies Exit Projects. A QTEL trained and licensed NYS certified Grade 8 Science teacher will co-teach 4/ 1-hour sessions of very small group work to assist students in completing all components of Grade 8 Science Exit Projects. A NYS certified Social Studies teacher will co-teach for 4/ 1-hour sessions to assist very small groups of students complete their Social Studies Exit Projects. We will continue to learn on MacIntosh computers. We will add 2 new Mac Book Pro’s to our collection of Mac Books so all students/parents can work on the same operating systems. Science Co-Teaching will take place on Mondays from 4:30 P.M.-5:30 P.M. Monday, November 24 th , 2014 Monday, December 8 th , 2014 Monday, January 26 th , 2014 Monday, March 16 th , 2015 Social Studies Co-Teaching will take place on Mondays from 4:30 P.M.-5:30 P.M. Monday, December 15 th , 2014 Monday, February 9 th , 2015 Monday, March 9 th , 2015 Monday, March 30 th , 2015 7  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information *** ALTHOUGH WE ARE A CONCEPTIONALLY CONSOLIDATED SCHOOL, WE ARE INCLUDING THE CATEGORIES THE MONIES ARE TO BE SCHEDULED IN: SALARY: $6950 PARENTS: $1017.50 (salary for teachers giving workshops) PD: $1012.50 (salary for teachers giving/taking PD) SUPPLIES: $2220 (2 Mac Book Pros) Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The licensed ESL teacher will hold 3/1hour and 30 minute sessions of PD for the 3 teachers working in the after school program. Teachers will be paid the training rate. The licensed ESL teacher will provide Professional Development for the Science, Technology, and Social Studies teachers. She will concentrate on using ESL methodology when teaching the skills needed to do meaningful and productive research. Formats for writing and researching projects using PC’s and Mac’s on the web will also be focused on. The ESL teacher will discuss how these can most effectively be taught using ESL methodologies, especially all aspects of instructional scaffolding. There will be 3 sessions of PD for 1hour 30 minutes each. They will take place in the ESL classroom, Room 202. The tentative schedule is as follows: -Wednesday, November 19 th , 2014 3 P.M.-4:30 P.M. -Tuesday, January 27 th , 2015 4 P.M.-5:30 P.M. -Tuesday, February 3 rd , 2015 4 P.M.-5:30 P.M. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parents of all ELLs will be informed of the Title III after school program with written notification in both English and their native language. Parents will be invited to 5 small group parent/child technology classes . Each parent will sit next to their child for introductory classes in word processing, searching the web, and writing 8  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities research reports. The majority of our students and parents speak Haitian Creole/French/English. Most of our parents emigrated to the U.S.A. prior to bringing our students' here. Thus, most of the parents are fluent in English. Parental RSVP's regarding attendance at the technology sessions, will drive the professionals in attendance. We will utilize the services of a Haitian Creole/French speaking teacher, the ESL teacher will translate for the Spanish speaking parents, and our Arabic speaking paraprofessional, will translate for our Arabic speaking parents. The knowledge parents gain will empower them to help and guide their children in completing standards based research. It is our hope that this program will inspire our parents to pursue other avenues of learning as to how they can incorporate technology, as an educational tool, into their lives. This technology training will prepare both students and their parents for higher education and the working world. They will learn to function in a world where computers dominate. All parent workshops will be 1 hour in length and will take place in the ESL classroom Room 202. Both the ESL and Technology teachers will be present, so that we can maximize the parent’s experience. • Monday, December 1 st , 2014: Introduction to “Word Processing”/ Using the Speech Recognition Tools and translation sites to facilitate ELLs • Monday, January 12 th , 2015: How parents can help their children do meaningful research using the internet and other resources • Monday, February 2 nd , 2015: How to use lesser known/student friendly websites • Monday, February 23 rd , 2015: How to use word processing to adhere to the format and rubrics for Science and Social Studies Research and Exit Projects, including Power Point presentations • Monday, April 20 th , 2015: Celebration and presentation of final written, oral and Power Point research project Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 9  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 0  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 18 School Name John Wilson Borough Brooklyn School Number 211 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Carolyn James Coach Nathalie Delince ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Randi Goldman Teacher/Subject Area Haashim Job / Math Teacher/Subject Area Ruth Ledgister / ELA Related-Service Provider Natasha Manoo Superintendent Beverly Wilkins Assistant Principal Fidelis Okorafer Coach Nathalie Delince School Counselor Catherine Letren Parent Myriam Cadet Parent Coordinator Guy Williams Field Support Center Staff Member Dr. Jo Ann BenoitSenior Direct Other (Name and Title) Dr. Soeurette Fougere, Distric C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 523 1 Total number of ELLs 33 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 6.31%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 3 2 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? If students have no English language whatsoever, the NYSITELL is the sole assessment tool. Benchmark and portfolio assessments are administered in all subject areas. Students with disabilities are evaluated as per their IEP. The data confirms that students learn a second language much like they learned a first language; comprehending the spoken word, then speaking, reading and writing. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Math and ELA Lead Teachers, create monthly Benchmarks for all teachers to administer, in order to monitor and track progress. 2  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The NYSESLAT is used as our annual assessment tool. Our school continues to meet its’ AYP on the NYSESLAT annually. We use the data from our assessment tests and NYS exams and compare the ELL's growth with that of their classmates. We assess all baselines for each student to identify areas of need. We follow many of our students after they graduate from I.S. 211. Our former students continue to have tremendous success in high school and continue on to college. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We invite students to our ELA and Math After School programs, Saturday Academy, Lunch 'N 'Learns, AIS, Midnight Run, small group pull out groups and peer tutors. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Students are identified as needing RtI based upon evaluations done by subject area and ENL teachers. We give students tiered instructional support. Our staff adds layers of support corresponding to the Common Core curriculum.Support changes as needs of individual students change. Duration and intensity of intervention, changes with student needs. As the students improve, based upon valid assessments, scaffolding is removed layer by layer. If the student doesn't make progress, we go to the next level of differentiated instruction. We give these students targeted and intensive academic support based on their diverse needs and focus on specific learning targets. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The 2017 data pattern across all NYSESLAT modalities showed that Newcomers made the most significant gains in all modalities. there were 2 students, one grade 6 and the other grade 7, who surprisingly, still tested in. Aida Walqui ( 2000 ) states that instructional programs with high levels of rigor and support result in higher academic achievement of ELL's. Our unique Cultural Arts Academy structure continues to enhance our ability to work together as a cohesive unit. We will certainly continue to raise the bar and propel our students to meet high levels of success. Students continue to score lower on the Writing modality than the other three. Students no longer score highest on the Speaking modality. Speaking scores were not as high as previous years. This is due to the complexity and difficulty of the NYSESLAT Speaking modality. Many of our students scored lower in the Listening part on the NYSESLAT than on the Reading. This follows the natural progression of how children learn their native language. After analyzing the NYSESLAT modality scores, we will concentrate on making the spoken word more comprehensible. This will be done using read alouds, having students follow extensive oral directions, note taking while listening to oral lessons, and re-presenting story scenarios others tell them. We will concentrate on making the written word more comprehensible. This will be done by using leveled and age appropriate reading material, one-on-one reading with the teacher, the use of phonics, and bilingual glossaries. "Student Choice" of culminating lesson activity will be given whenever feasible, in all subject areas. This will give students the freedom to write about what they know, and enable them to feel comfortable using the written word. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We disseminate and discuss the results of all assessment tests at weekly Department Meetings, Congruency, After School PD on Mon. and Tues. Part IV: ELL Programming 3  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The ESL program at I.S. 211 is both a standalone and integrated English as a New Language program committed to raising the standards of all English Language Learners. We do not have any self-contained ESL classes. There are a total of 25 ENL students in the school plus 7 students who scored at the COMMANDING level within the past 2 years. Regular education students are in one class on a grade. This facilitates programming for a combination of standalone and integrated ENL programs. This organization ensures that every ELL receives the mandated number of instructional minutes according to their proficiency level. During standalone classes, students are grouped according to their proficiency level on the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL. Students are grouped so that they are on no more than 2 contiguous grades. SWD are placed in classes based on their IEPs. ELLs are assured their mandated number of instructional minutes by the ESL teacher as per CR Part 154. b. TBE program. If applicable. N.A. c. DL program. If applicable. N.A. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Entering and Emerging students receive 8/45 minute periods of ENL weekly. Entering ELL's get 180 minutes of stand-alone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA; Emerging ELL's receive at least 2/45 minute periods of stand-alone and 4/45 minute periods of integrated ENL weekly plus 2/45 minute periods of stand-alone or integrated ENL weekly. Transitioning and Expanding students receive 4/45 minute periods of ENL weekly. Transitioning ELL's receive 2/45 minute periods of integrated ENL and 2/45 minute periods of stand-alone or integrated ENL; Expanding ELL's receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL. Commanding ELL's receive 2/45 minute periods of integrated ENL for 2 years after they test out of ENL on the NYSESLAT. We do not offer HLA. Presently, we have 6 Special Needs ELL's, 2 are NYSAA, 1 has an "Alternate Placement Paraprofessional", and 4 are LTE's. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All ENL instruction for regular education students is a combination of stand-alone and integrated instruction. SWD's are served as per their IEP's and receive all their ENL instruction in a pull-out/push-in format. This is based on the results of their NYSITELL and NYSESLAT scores. We do not have any HLA programs, however, native language support for the content areas are given through the use of bilingual glossaries and when needed, the assistance of our multi-lingual staff. The ENL teacher provides content area support for ELL's by using bilingual glossaries and bilingual picture glossaries, OPD for the Content Areas , SIOP books , representing content area lessons in stand-alone groups, and integrated content area classes. The staff at John Wilson follows a high-quality curriculum in a supportive and effective learning environment that enables our students to meet NYS’s student academic achievement standards. Classes travel together, except for related services. Students 4  are placed homogeneously. Targeted and differentiation of instruction is used in all subject areas to ensure all learners are reached. All content-area teachers enhance their lessons using Smart Boards. School leadership and teachers use the results of the Baseline Assessments to drive instruction. Instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to enrich language development includes cognitive involvement, as well as contextual support. Language in the Content Area is amplified. Teachers continue to emphasize the use of “scaffolding strategies” for ALL ELL subgroups. These include: bridging, modeling, contextualization, metacognitive development, text re-presentation and schema building. I.S. 211 combines the principles of second/new language learning with the language development necessary for success in the content area classes. This allows students to learn content area material while simultaneously developing English skills. Proficiency in the English language is essential in order to meet the standards in academic content areas. This is the explicit goal of the school leadership and teachers of our school. Literature and content based instruction is aligned to New York State Common Core Learning Standards and the Danielson Framework. Students learn English for information and understanding; English for literary response, enjoyment and expression; English for critical analysis and evaluation; English for social classroom interaction; and English for cross-cultural knowledge and understanding in the four modalities of listening , speaking, reading, and writing. Explicit ELA is delivered in 90 minute blocks. The Balanced Literacy program utilizes ESL methodologies within the workshop model and incorporates fluency, vocabulary and text comprehension of read alouds, shared reading, guided reading, independent reading and writer’s workshop; which all correspond to NYS CCLS in ELA. Students who are advanced/accelerated in ELA are invited to participate in a daily, early morning, enrichment program. Explicit Math is also delivered in 90 minute blocks utilizing the workshop model. New York State CCLS for Math are emphasized. CMP3 is supplemented by Glencoe Math and Go Math Hot Words, Hot Topics. Differentiated and Balanced Math lessons utilizing ESL methodologies include a Motivation: Explore: Think/Explore/Discuss, a mini-lesson, work period and culminates with a few minutes of Share/Summarize. Manipulatives are used whenever appropriate. Advanced/accelerated Grade 8 students are invited to participate in an A.M. Integrated Algebra Regents Course. Explicit Science includes extended blocks of time to allow for more time on task. ESL methodologies are combined with differentiated instruction . The curriculum is aligned with the NYS CCLS for Science. Teachers collaborate on making unit and lesson plans as a department. Power point presentations are filled with lots of graphics and pictures to make the lesson more comprehensible for all students. Lessons are supplemented and complemented by manipulatives and other realia, as well as hands-on lab classes. Students in all grades learn how to research and report various science topics, preparing them for their Grade 8 Exit Projects. Explicit Social Studies includes differentiated instruction utilizing ESL methodologies within the workshop model. The curriculum is aligned with the CCLS and NYC Scope and Sequence. Teachers collaborate on making unit and lesson plans as a department. Power point presentations are a point of all lessons. This truly brings history to life! Students engage in Socratic seminars on a regular basis. All students learn how to gather, research and write research papers preparing them for their Grade 8 Exit Projects. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELL's are formally evaluated in their native language, only if after intervention, they are recommended to SBST, and it has been determined that this is necessary for the child's academic success. Otherwise, native language evaluations are done informally by one of our multi-lingual staff members with the ESL teacher present. Students use bilingual glossaries for classwork, homework and exams. When needed, our subject area teachers continue to translate tests and notes in the native languages of their students. Utilizing both English and the native language enables newcomers to learn mathematical and science concepts in a more comprehensive way. Taking tests in both English and their Native Language, prepares ELL's for the NYS Math and Science tests, 5  as well. The Math teachers of our Grade 7 and 8 ELL's , speak French and Haitian Creole. They use these languages sparingly, but it is comforting to both students and parents alike, to have teachers who can explain things in their Native Language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status ALL ELL'S AND FORMER ELL'S WHO TESTED OUT IN THE PAST 2 YEARS RECEIVE EXTENDED TIME ON ALL NYC AND NYS ASSESSMENTS. THE ARE ENTITLED TO BE IN A SEPARATE LOCATION, USE A BILINGUAL GLOSSARY AND TAKE ALL FORMAL ASSESSMENTS ( EXCEPT THE ELA AND NYSESLAT) IN THEIR NATIVE LANGUAGE . a. SIFE are offered a variety of supplementary services in addition to ENL in (2) 45 minute blocks. These include: AIS, a special after school program 1 hour daily and/or a 2 day after school Math program and two day a week ELA program. In addition there is a Saturday academy for Math and ELA. When deemed necessary, instructional adaptations are utilized. Interventions include grouping students of mixed proficiencies for activities; grouping students according to homogeneous proficiencies, grouping according to their learning styles, cultural backgrounds and educational experiences, adapting materials to their needs, utilizing computer software, hands-on, teacher-made and other supplementary materials; differentiated and targeted instruction. Also available are counseling, Pupil Personnel Committee, referrals for related services and referrals to community agencies. b. Newcomers receive 8/45 minute periods of stand-alone and integrated ENL instruction weekly. Instruction is aligned with the NYS Common Core ESL Learning Standards. The curriculum draws on the cultural and linguistic diversity of the ELL’s, and the rich and varied understandings these students bring from their prior experiences. Gibbons (1993) states that it is through the use of talk that learning occurs. “Talk” allows learners to think aloud, and can be used as a means to model effective learning strategies. Talk also helps ELL’s to formulate ideas and learn in a context that does not include the more formal demands that written language require. Since there is a very strong correlation between oral language development and literacy development, meaningful communication is encouraged between teacher-student and student-student. Listening, speaking, reading and writing skills are developed through differentiated instruction that utilizes second language methodology. Successful approaches include: Total Physical Response, Natural Approach, Language Experience, Cognitive Academic Language Learning, Scaffolding and QTEL. Teachers are encouraged to pair newcomers with more advanced students who speak their language. Students who "mentor" receive Archon credit. All ELL’s are expected to meet the same high standards as the rest of the I.S. 211 population. ELL’s receive explicit ESL instruction in all content areas by a NYS certified and NYC licensed TESOL. It is an interdisciplinary program that develops all four language skills: listening, speaking, reading, and writing. We adhere to the 5 NYS CCLS for ESL which promote ESL instruction that is closely aligned with CCLS for ELA and content-area instruction. Appropriate language instructional materials support ESL instruction. The use of native language picture dictionaries is encouraged We continue to use Universal Design for Learning. It aligns the curriculum to Common Core Learning Standards. It especially supports ELL's and students with special needs. Aligned tasks are embedded in each unit of study. Each Common Core-Aligned Task is accompanied by a variety of instructional supports including: culminating performance tasks, guidance and use of UDL principles for each task, rubrics and/or scoring guides, annotated student work ranging across levels and task specific supports. 6  c Developing ELL's participate in a balanced literacy approach which includes phonics, fluency, vocabulary and text comprehension. Ongoing assessments include: retelling of stories, use of figurative language, rubrics, standardized Interim Assessments, and conferencing with subject area teachers. Some of the strategies used include: use of prior knowledge, word walls, modeling, graphic organizers, frequent summaries, re-presentation, meaningful “talk”, and student choice, thus providing activities using different modalities while using the workshop model. Students learn in an environment that is organized, stimulating, and comfortable in order to maximize their language and literacy development. d Specific needs of individual long-term ELL’s are assessed by their subject area teachers, as well as the ESL teacher and other support staff. Results of standardized tests, benchmark test scores, Alternate Assessment and monthly ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies assessments, are combined with teacher assessments of class work, homework, promotional folders and anecdotals, to determine the specific needs of each student. Based on these findings, the long-term ELL may be placed in a class with the following services; AIS, NEWSELA, Engage NY, Commonlit and Orton Collingham. In addition, they may be recommended for the Saturday Academy, Extended Day Program (2) 50 minute instruction. We no longer are entitled to a Title III ESL After-school Program. Most of our Long-Term ELL’s are Students With Disabilities.They receive differentiated instruction that is spelled out in their IEP’s. e Former ELL's up to 2 years after exiting ENL receive at least 2/45 minute periods weekly of ENL in the content area. These services are integrated within their ELA and Math classes. They are grouped accordingly and the ESL teacher differentiates the instruction using pictures, modeling, frequent summaries and re-presentation. As in all our classes, scaffolding is used. The parents' of former ELL's who tested at the Commanding level in the past 2 years on the NYSESLAT, are notified in their native language that their child tested out and will be receiving 90 minutes of ESL weekly. Proficient level students continue to learn through scaffolding, and remain in the “Cultural Arts Academy.” They are placed in the same class on each grade as the ELL’s so that they can benefit from the push-in services the ESL teacher provides during periods of push-in. Students who received a score of Proficient on the NYSESLAT in the past 2 years are entitled to extended time on all NYS exams; bilingual versions of the exams and/or exams translated in to their native language. They are also invited to participate in all special events geared specifically towards the ELL’s. They are encouraged to visit the ESL teacher regularly to discuss concerns, problems, progress, etc. Subject area teachers are informed that Proficient level students are second language learners and may have needs that are different than native English learners and more similar to the ELL’s in their class. All ELL’s are afforded access to all school programs. The ESL teacher informs parents about the programs at our monthly meetings. The Parent Coordinator informs parents of all school activities on a regular basis. In addition to the targeted intervention programs listed above, ELL's are also invited to participate in Sesame Flyers-an after-school program that provides students with a unique blend of sports, arts and academic instruction-meets Mon.-Thurs. 2:45P.M.-5:45P.M. Some students attend a new academic/sports after school program that is held at the nearby HES. They are invited to Saturday Preparatory Academy, Midnight runs that take place before the NYS exams, and the academic only ELA and Math after school programs. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Our ELL-SWD's are expected to learn the same Common Core curriculum as our mainstream students. Instructional strategies for these students is the same. SWD's have more re-presentation, scaffolding and repetition. Teachers address the specific needs of their students by presenting and re-presenting using a variety of visual formats. ANSWER combined with #7 below. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? RESPONSE to #'s 6-7 7  Teachers of ELL-SWD's utilize age-appropriate materials consistent with their grade level curriculum. ESL strategies are especially beneficial to the ELL-SWD. Total Physical Response is a time proven successful methodology when used with all levels of ELL's. The Natural Approach, Scaffolding, Partnering, etc. are also used. Teachers of ELL-SWD's incorporate the same basic ESL methodologies as their general ed colleagues. Teachers are made aware of the students' background, previous educational experiences and all pertinent family information ( i.e: did the child move to the U.S. with family, is he/she living with a parent, if not, then who?) Teachers are nurturing and highly professional. There are teacher made materials that reflect the ELL's level of English ability and their educational capability. Materials reflect the classroom population and other cultures, well. SWD's in 12:1 classes are expected to follow the same curriculum as general ed students. Lessons are enhanced with Sheltered English books and teacher made materials. Activities utilizing different modalities and graphic orgnizers, help the students "see" what they are learning. Simple directions, modeling, demonstraions, frequent summaries, realia and representation, make learning more comprehensible for the ELL-SWD. Students in 12:1:1classes follow a somewhat different curriculum; it is based more on their IEP. Many of their educational activities are taught in centers. Interactive groups allow students to take on different assignments to complete the assigned tasks. There is lots of flexibility in timing for most activities that these students engage in. Students who take the NYS assessment exams receive extended time as per their IEP. They are entitled to take the exams in English and/or their native language. If the exam is not available in their native language, they are entitled to oral translations. Presently, the IEP's of 1 of our ELL- SWD's indicate the students needs an alternate placement paraprofessional; none indicate the student needs a health paraprofessional; 2 are NYSAA. These students are all in self-contained classes. This year, 18% of the ELL population is SWD's. This is a lower percentage than usual. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All targeted intervention programs are in English only and are open to all ELL’s. Students are placed in these programs if they scored a 1-2 on the previous year's NYS ELA and/or NYS Math exams, students who are failing content area courses, students who have been recommended to SBST for testing, and SIFE. Programs outside of the regular school day including Sesame Flyers, Saturday Preparatory Academy, and Christmas/New Years, February and Spring Vacation academic program, Midnight Run. In addition, all our ELL's are invited to participate in the offsite HES after school programs. SWD's are encouraged to participate in our one hour after school program Mon.-Thurs. In all of these programs, children receive instructional strategies that will ensure their success in ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies and give them academic confidence. Use of the native language is not regularly used in intervention programs. However, the assistance of our multi-lingual staff is always available, as are native language dictionaries, bilingual glossaries, and bilingual picture dictionaries. When feasible, students are placed in an intervention program with a teacher and/or paraprofessional who speaks their native language. Targeted interventions used by all subject teachers include small group instruction, differentiation, differentiated tasks, leveled questions and scaffolding, modeling, re-presenting and Frayer Model online Targeted intervention for ELA includes: chunking and CLOSE reading, AIS, 2/45 minute blocks for extended day, one-to-one and small group instruction, conferencing, Lunch'n'Learns, pull-out instruction and push-in by lead teachers, resource room teacher and ELL specialist. 90 minute time blocks increase students' time in task, and allow for differentiated instruction and 8  flexible grouping based on student assessments including standardized test data, item skills analysis, in house summative formal and informal assessments, portfolios and teacher conferencing and observation. Targeted intervention for Math is using CMP3 MATHEMATICS supplemented by Glencoe Math and Go Math.. The HWHT Planning Guide provides students with additional support on concepts through practice problem sets and a glossary of mathematical terms, symbols and formulas. Students get additional help during 2/50 minute blocks weekly, small group instruction, Lunch'n'Learns, pull-out instruction, and push-in by lead teachers, resource room teacher, and ELL specialist. The ESL teacher gives all ELL's a bilingual math glossary in their native language and English, to use at school and at home. Math picture glossaries in English only are also made available. Targeted intervention for Science includes extended blocks of class time to allow for more time on task and flexible grouping for differentiated instruction in the science content with a focus on content literacy strategies and supports for ELL's ( bilingual Science picture dictionaries and The Oxford Picture Dictionary for the Content Areas.) Exit project assistance is offered on Saturday mornings after the ELA and Math tests. Morning tutorials will be implemented prior to the NYS Science exam. Targeted intervention for Social Studies includes extended blocks of class time to allow for more time to be on task and flexible grouping during small group instruction, allowing for differentiated instruction. Exit Project assistance is part of the Saturday Academy. Oxford Picture Dictionary for the Content Areas, and Land, People, Nation ( a history series for ELL's ) is utilized, as well. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? In addition to the ELA and Math after school and Saturday academy, we will have an outside group come in to run a recreation and homework help program. All subject areas are also using "Vocabulary.com" and a writing program for our ELA classes from Teachers College.We will be using "Algebra for ALL" for all grades. The goal of this program is that students will learn to think "Algebraically." We recently started an after school music program with an outside agency. Students are learning how to play string instruments. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N.A. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELL's are afforded access to all school programs. The ENL teacher informs parents about the programs at our monthly meetings. The Parent Coordinator informs parents of all school activities on a regular basis. The school gives each student a monthly calendar which lists after school programs, events, games, parent meetings and subject specific learning goals of the week . In addition to the targeted intervention programs previously listed, ELL's are also invited and encouraged to participate in all after school programs, monthly dances and teams. The ESL teacher attends many events, to help the ELL's feel comfortable in their new surroundings. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials used to support the learning of ALL ELL’s in a balanced literacy program include: a leveled, diversified, genre-rich classroom library which includes a large selection of picture books and an extensive multicultural section; The Basic Oxford Picture Dictionary with workbooks and cassette tapes; The New Oxford Picture Dictionary with workbooks, cassette tapes and CD-ROM; The Oxford Picture Dictionary with workbooks and CD-ROM (this is every ELL’s favorite); The Oxford Picture Dictionary for the Content Areas with Word and Picture cards, Content Readings and Content Chants; The Oxford 9  Picture Dictionary for Kids with Word and Picture Cards and Stories; English at your Command; Big Books, Rosen REAL Reading Programs-Collection 3/Read to Success, Phonics for the REAL World/Knowledge through Phonics; Focus on Fluency/Books and Tapes; assorted picture books with tapes representing all genres; Read All About It/Levels Pre-1, 1 and 2; Carolyn Graham’s Jazz Chants, Jazz Chant Fairy Tales, Grammar Chants and Small Talk; Word by Word Phonics level picture dictionaries; All Star English/Math, Science and Social Studies; Goodman’s All Stars/Levels 1 and 2; What a Life/High Beginning; Thoughts and Notions/High Beginning; Facts and Figures/Beginning Reading Level; Habitats of the World; Stories We Brought With Us; Very Easy True Stories; Easy True Stories, and more. There is a plethora of bilingual-picture and word-for-word dictionaries, as well as content area math and science picture dictionaries. All content area teachers use Smart Boards and, (at times) the students use computer “notebooks.” Through our Title III program, students have use of laptops and older desktop computers. We have a variety of educational software, including The Rosetta Stone. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? When needed, our Math teachers continue to translate tests and notes in to the children’s native language. Utilizing both English and the native language, enables newcomers to learn the mathematical concept and have follow through in a more comprehensive way. Taking tests in both English and their Native Language prepares ELL’s for the NYS Math test, as well. All our general ed grade 6- 8 ELL's are part of the general ed population of an Integrated Team Teaching Class. This year, the native language of the Math teacher for our Grade 7 ELL's speaks Haitian Creole and French. Our Grade 8 Math teacher is also a native Haitian Creole and French speaker. They all tend to use these languages sparingly, but it is comforting to both students and parents alike to have these teachers as part of our team. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required services and resources support and correspond to the age and grade levels of all our ELL’s. Teachers differentiate all their instruction and supplement it with scaffolding, manipulatives, realia, re-presentation, power points. The “Read All About It” series and “Action” magazine are excellent examples of ELL resources that correspond to the ages and grade levels of our middle school students. See #'s 8 & 9 above. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We now have a Charter Elementary school occupying part of our third floor. They do not have an ENL program. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Presently, we do not have any activities to assist newly enrolled ELL’s before the beginning of the school year. Students who are entering grade 6 from local elementary schools, have an opportunity to tour the building and visit the ENL classroom during the month of June. New ELL's who enroll throughout the school year meet the ENL teacher at registration. Staff give the parent and student a tour of the building and introduce them to key personnel. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish . 0  18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N.A. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Since there is no one person who can help a student become proficient in English, our layout allows the language development of the ELL's to be the Cultural Arts Academy's responsibility as a whole. Our school's response to the learning needs of ELL's is reflected in this unique policy. I.S. 211 is divided in to 2 small academies. These provide a more nurturing atmosphere for our students, and allows teams of teachers working closely with the same students to be trained together. These teachers are trained by the ENL teacher as they assess the students' needs and plan collaboratively. Students and teachers have close proximity to the ESL classroom, its' resources, and the ESL teacher. This allows for workshops during lunch, extended day on Mondays, Election Day, Brooklyn Day, and anytime we need to get together. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. This configuration facilitates more meaningful professional development in ESL strategies for all content area teachers, speech therapists, occupational/physical therapists, school psychologist, social worker, parent coordinator and pupil personnel secretary. However, we offer PD for ELL's to the entire school community. The staff shares understandings about language and literacy development, and has opportunities for exploring the teaching and learning issues implicit in second language development. In addition to assisting the pedagogues, these strategies help all the support staff to better communicate with both parents and students. Teachers and paraprofessionals and the entire I.S. 211 community, acquire an appreciation for the cultural diversities of our students. They receive training and Professional Development that focuses on ESL standards, instructional methodologies, scaffolding, differentiating instruction and the use of varied materials. We concentrate on how to make content area subjects more comprehensible for ELL’s. We address ways in which eighth grade ELL’s can research and complete their Science and Social Studies Exit Projects. As our ELL's transition from one level to another, cohorts meet to determine the most effective differentiated instruction for each student. Since all our general education ELL's are in one class on a grade, students are supported as they transition from one level to the next. We have always placed our newly proficient ( exited ) ELL's in the same classes as our ELL's, so they receive the continued support of the ELL teacher during integrated periods; and the expertise of teachers trained in ESL methodology. Afterall, CALP can take up to 7-8 years. These students are participants in all ELL events, as well as our Title III after school program. Lead Teachers and coachesl emphasize scaffolding techniques during Monday afternoon and full day PD workshops in all content areas. Teachers will be trained in the six types of scaffolding, which include; modeling, bridging, contextualization, schema building, text-re-presentation and metacognitive development. Staff will also receive PD on language acquisition, best practices for co-teaching and how to integrate language and content instruction for ELL's of all levels. They will learn how to use graphic organizers, the workshop model and writer’s workshop for ELL’s. In-house Lead Teachers will give PD in ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies. This includes the use of Benchmark assessments, running records, conferencing and other 1  assessment tools. The ESL teacher engages the staff in various ESL methodologies including TPR, The Natural Approach, Cooperative Learning, and Cognitive Academic Language Learning Approach (CALLA.) The doors to the ESL room are always opened, where staff are encouraged to borrow pedagogical resource books and materials for teachers of English Language Learners. One of the biggest concerns people have is how to communicate with the newcomer. Time tested techniques and ideas are happily shared, as well. Professional Development is also delivered during grade conferences and weekly subject area congruence meetings, study groups, and Lunch’n’Learns. Teachers are asked to sign in @ all PD sessions. Teachers are afforded the opportunity to take courses through the UFT and online. Teachers who are in a Masters degree program must take at least 6 credits in TESOL. The ESL teacher encourages them to observe her classes, browse and borrow materials and ask questions. In anticipation of a shortage of ENL and bilingual teachers, many colleges are offering graduate school extensions in ESL and bi-lingual education. Mercy College is one such school , where courses are being offered both online and at the schools numerous campuses. Some of our teachers are QTEL certified. In addition, there is in-class assistance to support teacher knowledge and instructional strategies. Articulation is ongoing through individual meetings, grade conferences, congruence and PD's. The ENL teacher will acquire her minimum of 50% of required professional development in language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction and best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ELL's, by going to city wide trainings, UFT trainings, District and Borough wide meetings and school based training. The ENL must sign in at all meetings and PD and keeps agendas and materials from all training. Our staff will sign in for all ENL PD given alone, as part of a larger PD and/or Congruence. Articulation between the ESL teacher and the mainstream teachers is ongoing throughout the school year so that the ESL program is congruent with subject area instructional programs. There is continuous communication with guidance counselors, social worker, school psychologist, SBST, Family Worker, Counselor, Parent Coordinator, school secretaries, and the administration and teachers Sesame Flyers Club. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Letters will be sent home in the parental language of choice, giving the parent a choice of a few dates and times to meet with the teacher. This will be followed by a phone call to confirm receipt of letter and explore time frames. Since the teacher will already be familiar with the parent, she will have an idea as to the parent work schedule, needs of other children and adults in the home, and language of communication that will have to be used. If desired, the parent will be encouraged to bring a family member to the meeting who speaks their language of choice. If not, the meeting will also be attended by someone on staff who speaks that language. If perchance, a staff member does not speak the language used in the home, we will make an appointment and call in to Language and Translation Services to translate. If the initial written outreach and telephone outreach is not responded to, the school will send a registered letter/return receipt requested/signed by the principal, informing the parent about the meeting. Of course this will be in the parental language of choice. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 2  Unfortunately, parental involvement of ELL parents has declined greatly since the presidential election in November, 2016. Many of our parents are not here legally and they are afraid to come to an official government building. We continue to reach out to our parents and reassure them that they are safe within the confines of our walls. We hope that the governments' policy will change and allow our parents the freedom and involvement they deserve to have in their child's education. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. We have recommended International High School at Lafayette High School, to most of our Grade 8 students. They have had exceptionally high rates of success. After the January, 2010 earthquake in Haiti, we had an influx of ELL's. All of them came to live with family….some of whom they had NEVER met before. Three years ago, we had 2 students graduate IHS. Andrise attended SUNY Old Westbury on a FULL Academic Scholarship AND graduated in just 3 years!!! Marvin is attending Kingsboro Community College. Two years ago, Andrise' sister Nancy, graduated as valedictorian of IHS . She received a $10,000 scholarship from a special program she attended Saturday mornings for four years, plus a full academic scholarship to Middlebury College in Vermont. Last year, another of our post-earthquake students, Shirleyka, graduated as valedictorian of IHS. She received scholarship offers from 3 renowned universities. She chose Skidmore in NYS. In addition to a FULL scholarship, she is also entitled to three semesters of study abroad with ALL expenses paid! She spent her first college semester in London! 3 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Carolyn James, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 4  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: John Wilson School DBN: 18K211 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Carolyn James Title Principal Fidelis Okorafer Assistant Principal Guy Williams Parent Coordinator Randi Goldman ENL/Bilingual Teacher Myriam Cadet Parent Ruth Ledgister / ELA Teacher/Subject Area Haashim Job / Math Teacher/Subject Area Nathalie Delince Coach Coach Catherine Letren School Counselor Beverly Wilkins Dr. Jo nn Benoit N/A N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other NA Other NA Other NA Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 5 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: John Wilson Superintendent: Beverly DBN: 18K211 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Randi Goldman ESL Teacher yes yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The written translation and oral interpretation needs of parents were initially determined at registration by both the ESL teacher and the pupil personnel secretary. Parents who are registering their children for the first time in a NYC public school, must come to the school and be interviewed by us, and answer questions on many different forms and documents. Those who are not proficient in English, usually come with a family member or neighbor who assists them in this process. If they do not come with their own interpreter, the school has been able to provide one from amongst our diverse, multilingual staff. It is at this initial interview that we are able to determine the written and oral interpretation needs of the parents of students who are newcomers to the NYC school system. We are also aware of the fact that there are parents of English proficient students who may be in need of interpretation and translation services. We obtain this information from various ATS reports, including RPOB. Blue 6  Emergency Contact Cards are reviewed to ascertain parental language of choice for school communication. The Parent Surveys are reviewed periodically to identify the language of parental choice for school notifications. The Pupil Personnel secretary inputs the parental language of choice at the time of registration. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language More than 90% of parents preferred language of both written and oral communication is English; 6% prefer Haitian Creole; 2% prefer Spanish;less than 1% prefer French; less than 1% prefer Arabic; 2 parents prefer Bengali and 1 parent Bambara or French. Percent Written Written Preferred ALL IS LISTED IN FIRST COLUMN 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to Families Annual handbooks at beginning of school year; September monthly calendars plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. These letters, books and pamphlets are all available 7  ; 4 night time and 2 day time announcements for parent-teacher conferences; high school directories, end of previous month after-school, Saturday Academy and vacation school programs (prior to starting dates ); PA notifications; letters regarding emergency situations; letters regarding building repairs; etc. online in our covered languages. If this changes, we will submit requests for translations to the Translation and Interpretation Unit at least 2 weeks prior to our need to disseminate. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? In September we will have a night-time curriculum night , 4 Open School Night conferences and 2 afternoon parent/teacher conferences. Weekly Tuesday afternoon parent outreach, guidance counselor group and individual meetings for high school admission applications; family worker and/or dean meetings when needed; workshops for specific core subject areas, International Family Thanksgiving Saturday, mandated one on one meeting with parents of ELL's t musical and vocal holiday performance in December, Black History month celebration in February, Women's History Celebration in March, talent show in June, and some events that we have not scheduled yet. 8  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We have a multi-lingual staff who are called upon to translate in school emergencies. If they are not present, we will call Translation phone services to assist us. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. As per the new Chancellors Regulations A-663 regarding parental notification requirements for trasnslation and interpretation services, I.S. 211 has signs in the lobby welcoming parents in the 5 covered languages ( Haitian Creole, French, Spanish, Arabic and Chinese) of our parents. ( See below PART D .) Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) So, too, upon entering our school, parents are informed in their native language, that translation and interpretation services are available. Rest room signage will also be in the languages of our parents. Bilingual glossaries for DOE terminology are always available in the main office. In addition, we will inform parents whose primary language is a covered language and who require language assistance services, with notification of the Bill of Parents Rights and Responsibilities, and instructions on how to obtain such services from the Department of Translation and Interpretation Services website: http://intranet.nycboe.net/SchoolSupport/translation and interpretation_unit. Parents will be notified of the School Safety Plan in their native language and informed on how they can reach a person who speaks their language in case of an emergency. All letters to parents about placement in ESL are in translated versions. When conferences regarding academic programs, transfers and discharges are needed, translations and interpretations are available in house. Parents are always welcome to bring an adult family member and/or adult friend to interpret for them. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parents come to many diverse events in our school. When they sign in, they will be asked for feedback on the quality and availability of translation and interpretation services. We are thinking of creating an easy to fill out form that 9  includes questions parental experiences with translation and interpretaion. This form would be translated in to the covered languages we need. 0 
