 17K221 School Name: P.S. 221 TOUSSAINT L'OUVERTURE Principal: FLORENTINE ULYSSE   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: P.S. 221 Toussaint L’Ouverture 17K221 331700010221 Pre-K - 5 School Number (DBN): 791 Empire Boulevard, Brooklyn N.Y. 11213 (718) 756-0122 (718)953-2657 Phone Number: Florentine Ulysse Fax: Email Address: fulysse@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Florentine UlysseI.A Jepthahlin Scott Valerie Williams Averill Mason-Scantlebury NA NA NA NA District Information Geographical District: 17 Mr. Clarence Ellis Superintendent: 1224 park place, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11213 Superintendent’s Office Address: Cellis3@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718)221-4372 Phone Number: (718)221-4326 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Brooklyn South Mauriciere DeGovia FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 415 89th Street, Brooklyn, NY 11209 MDegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 759-5131 Phone Number: NA Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Florentine UlysseI.A Jepthahlin Scott Valerie Williams Mary Fernandez Tameisha Archer Ramona Barker *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent   Name Candy Mary Brown Jacqueline Layne SavitreeWilliams Tamu Francis Michelle Haynesworth Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? We believe that it “takes a village to raise a child”. Therefore, we envision our school as a community of learners. Everyone is actively involved in the educational process: students, staff and parents. Our mission is to empower our students to become critical thinkers who are able to communicate effectively and develop skills and knowledge to help them become productive members of society. We all share in the responsibility of helping our students reach their goals in a nurturing, and supportive environment.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The P.S. 221 community will provide a safe, nurturing environment that will develop self-esteem and prepare each and every student to function as responsible members in their local and global communities. Students will be encouraged to reach their levels of academic excellence. The current instructional programs used to support our goals are ReadyNY and Benchmark writing for grades 3-5 and Wonders along with Benchmark writing for grades K-2. We use Go Math K-5, Passport Social Studies and Amplify Science grades K-2. We will also integrate the arts through collaborations with outside CBO's. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. P.S. 221 has two self-contained special education classes. They are both multiple grades. The lower grade class consists of students in grades K,1, and 2 and the upper-grade consists our students in grades 3,4, and 5. The lower grade students are having difficulty focusing, processing and retrieving information which directly connects to their level of comprehension. The upper-grade students are also having difficulty comprehending, mainly in ELA. Many are having difficulty sounding words and understanding vocabulary. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. This year based on feedback from the Quality Review and and feedback for the staff we will focus on Collaborative Teachers to ensure that we are using data to improve teaching and learning across all content areas for all students. 0  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 17K221 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 300 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 29 25 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 36 29 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 91.0% % Attendance Rate 86.3% % Reduced Lunch 3.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 0.3% 9.7% 2.7% % Black or African American % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0.1 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 37.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 82% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 20 18 88.6% 4.0% 18.3% 86.7% 0.7% 0.3% 2 4% 14.1 35.2% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: .Experienced Staff. Identified Areas for improvement: Collaborative teachers using data to improve instructional outcomes for all students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, grades K – 5 students will increase their grade level proficiency in ELA and math from Fall 2018 to Spring 2019 as measured by Fountis and Pinnell running record data, ELA and Math Benchmark assessments and writing on demand results. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 1. Professional Development – Teachers will participate in professional development on implementing the F&P assessment with fidelity. Teachers will also be trained on how to use the data to provide all students with differentiated learning tasks. We will also utilize Generation Ready as a literacy consultant to support implementation of the Ready Gen and Wonders curriculum. We will provide teachers with at least 3 days a week of common planning time. Teachers will use this time to analyze data and plan accordingly. Grade K-5 Teachers Gen Ed. Students, Special Needs and ENL Students Sept. 2018- Principal June 2019 Assistant Principal Literacy coach 1. Pedagogy Teachers will receive frequent observation and feedback using the Danielson Framework and classroom snapshots All Teachers Sept 2018 Principal June 2019 Assistant Principal PD Team Members 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will use parent engagement times to provide parents with information around our plan to implement rigorous instruction. We will use PTA meetings to share with the community. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 3  We will use Benchmark (F&P) data, teacher expertise, professional development Mondays and common planning times to achieve this goal. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The school Leadership Team will use data from various assessment results and action plan to determine if we are on track with meeting our goal. The action plan will be revised based on information gathered from assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) MOSL Assessments, F&P Benchmark data, Writing assessments, unit assessments, interim assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? We are committed to maintaining a supportive learning environment where students are respectful and engaged at all times. Strengths: The students, parents, and teachers feel safe and comfortable with each other and in turn contribute to each others academic and social needs, raising every one’s motivation and overall feeling of community. Needs: Currently, our attendance rate is at 89% which is well below the the city's average. We need to begin a campaign around improving student attendance rate which will improve student achievement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the administrative cabinet will work collaboratively with teacher teams to plan monthly assemblies that will celebrate student achievement and attendance to build student and teacher culture and improve attendance by 5%. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 1.Principal, Assistant Principals,Teachers Universal Literacy CoachTeachers and students will play a big role in creating an element of trust within the capacity framework through student self assessment and learning.Specifically, teachers will build student autonomy and allow students to take the initiative and become more responsible and accountable for self assessment of their learning by implementing opportunities for self assessment during specific parts of lessons. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students, All Staff Sept. 2018 -June 2019 Administration, Teachers, Students In an effort to increase family involvement, the Teachers Parent Coordinator, PA, and Family Assistant will be used to heighten communication between the schools and families via newsletters, websites, social media,Parent Engagement Tuesdays, meetings, etc . Parents and Families September 2018-June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will collaborate with the Parent Teacher Association and use the time before the monthly celebrations to meet with parents and provide them with information/workshops, on we are doing as a school to support student achievement and how we can partner with families to improve student attendance and overall student achievement. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Teachers, Professional Development Mondays, Generation Ready Literacy Consultants, 6  . Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The School Leadership Team will , review progress towards meeting the annual goal on a monthly basis make adjustments to the action plan is necessary. We will look for increased student attendance and parent attendance at the monthly sessions. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Weekly attendance averages, parent attendance at meetings and family workshops, improved student outcomes based on higher attendance rates. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: School leaders consistently organize time for teachers to meet in both grade level and vertically aligned teams. Identified areas for improvement: While teachers were meeting on a weekly basis in the past, we recognized that our students require continuous revisions to the curriculum based on our data. Looking at our current 3rd grade students are on average 1 and 1/2 years behind in literacy based on the grade 2 universal literacy assessment. Our current grade 4 students performed below the city average in 5 areas in ELA most specifically in standards RL 3.2, RL 3.5, and RL 3.3. our students are struggling with writing to resources, word meaning and referring to parts. Teachers meeting as a team will now in engage in data protocols that will support students with foundational practices as well as what is needed to perform on grade level. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 100% of Pre-K-5 teachers will meet in teacher teams to use student data to refine, revise, implement and evaluate curriculum to ensure higher student engagement as measured by a 5% increase on the ELA and Math assessments. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Instruction: Grade 1 teachers will collaboratively group students for RTI instruction focusing on various elements to improve fluency. Classroom teachers grades K-5 September 2018- June 2019 Classroom teachers, Principal, Assistant Principals Kindergarten teachers will preview each unit of study, list all skill, strategies, and standards that will be addressed, analyze data from unit assessments, plan as a grade to address deficiencies. Professional Development:Instructional leadership Team will meet weekly to discuss data and professional learning for the Teacher Team meetings and professional development Mondays. Professional Development supported by Generation Ready on looking at student work and refining curriculum during weekly teacher team meetings. Classroom teachers grades K-5 September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, principal, Assistant Principal Teachers September - June 2019 Teachers, principal, Assistant Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will provide parents with progress reports 4 times a year in addition to report cards. Teachers will utilize the parent engagement time to update parents on curriculum topics and provide learning opportunities. Teachers will invite parents to share insights about their child to drive achievement. September 2018 - June 2019 - Guided by administration, parent coordinator and guidance counselor. We will have monthly parent meetings to communicate the expectations of the common core standards. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional Development 80 minute Mondays will be the time teachers will meet in teacher team meetings to discuss student data and refine curriculum. We will leverage Generation Ready as our consultant to support this initiative. 9  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Every week the administrative team will review school wide data. We will be administer interim assessments to students at least 3 times a year to assess achievement towards our ELA and Math annual goal October, January and April. We will also assess our students 3 times a year using Fountis and Pinnell literacy benchmark to track student literacy progress. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Fountis and Pinnell reading levels, Interim Assessments, writing assessments, Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders will plan and implement a series of differentiated professional development learning around engaging students in learning resulting in a 15% increase in teacher in teachers scoring effective rating in Danielson 3C component. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The school’s Professional Development Team will meet monthly to collaboratively plan the professional development staff will e offered based on an in depth needs assessment. Classroom teachers grades K-5 9/18-6/19 Classroom teachers, Principal, Assistant Principals Parents will be encouraged to continuously participate in school-wide decision making by participating in the School Leadership Team meetings. The School Leadership Team will collaborate monthly to design the school's comprehensive educational program. Parents and Families 9 2018- School Leadership Team June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. P.S. 221 will engage parents during Tuesday's parent Engagement, parent association meetings, monthly parent workshops in the New Generation Standards in both ELA and Math. Parents will be given access to computer based programs that are aligned to the standards to support students at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Generation Ready-A consultant, the Professional Development Team, Expertise of teachers, Field Support Center coaches, Assistant Principal Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2  We will use weekly surveys/ feedback forms to ascertain the effectiveness of professional development on a weekly basis. The feedback forms will be used to guide future professional development offerings. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student learning outcomes during observations and assessments as well as improved ratings on Danielson component 3C will be used to determine the effectiveness of professional development. We will also use surveys and feedback forms to determine our progress towards the goal. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: During family meetings, workshops and any other relevant parent activities, parents will receive information and/or support for their children academically, with a specific emphasis on understanding best practices for supporting ELLs, SWD , and at-risk learners. Identified Areas of improvement: A review of the 2017 School Environment Survey indicated that parents want more opportunities for workshops and to receive community information. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all parents will receive communication on school wide events and parent workshops through the following mediums; parent newsletter, parent handbook, school messenger, PS 221 School APP, facebook account, progress reports, report cards which will increase attendance to parent meetings by 5%. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Bi-Weekly parent workshops around common core/next generation standards. Supports for families at home. Parents 9/18–6/19 Teachers, principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator District Supports Monthly workshops by staff from the office of Mental Health Parents 9/18–6/19 Office of Mental Parenting Journey classes NA 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Health Parents 1018 – 6/19 Sapis Worker NA NA NA If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Brooklyn Field Support Center, District Family Leadership Coordinator, Sapis Worker, Parent Coordinator Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will review progress towards this goal every 2nd Tuesday of the month during our School Leadership Team meeting. We will review feedback from each parent meeting as well as surveys to the community. 5  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Surveys and end or workshop feedback forms. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) English Language Arts (ELA) State ELA Data, Running Records, Performance Tasks, Unit Tests, Practice ELA Test Mathematics State test results Science Proficiency score levels of 1 and 2 on classroom science assessments. Teacher referral Proficiency score levels of 1 and 2 on classroom social studies assessments.Teachereferral. Teacher referral, Parent request Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Close reading, phonics, interactive writing, Progress ELA Manipulatives ,math games, Progress Manipulatives, experiments, repeated reading. EngageNY and targeted interventions based on the Foss Science Curriculum Repeated reading, close reading Puppetry, repeated reading, interactive writing, therapeutic games, crafts Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group and one-to-one When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the day Tier 2 Small group During the day Tier 2 Small group During the day Tier 2 Small group During the day Small group, one-to-one During the day 7  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Presently we have approximately 31 students residing in temporary housing as indicated in ATS.. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We provide uniform packages which consist of a school colored sweat suit, and two shirts/blouses. The student also receives a book bag filled with school supplies. We also provide emotional support through counseling. We monitor class trips and events to insure each STH is able to participate. We have staff members to assist them with assignments. We make sure that they have access to computers for research assignments. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 8  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 9  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Administrative staff attends hiring fairs to fill vacancies. ● The payroll secretary will work closely with the Field support personnel to ensure required mandates are meet with non-highly qualified staff. The hiring committee will consist of administration, teachers and parents. Some of the strategies administration will provide are leadership and growth opportunities for teachers, opportunities for collaboration, incorporate teacher feedback in decision-making and creating a humane environment. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Administration will attend PD provided by the district as well as online PD. Staff will be attend PD provided by the district, institutes of higher learning, online PD and PD provided by the administration. Information will be turn-keyed to entire staff. Technology will be infused in the sessions. A few strategies used to provide Highly Qualified professional development are ensuring that the PD is aligned to the school's goals and state standards, inclusion of modeling of content,provide collaboration opportunities, and include continuous feedback. Data from observations and teacher input will be utilized to differentiate PD experiences Teacher interest, learning style and readiness to learn will be incorporated when planning PD sessions. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 0  NA Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Pre K and Kindergarten will have an open house where new admits are invited in to meet staff and introduce parents to the curriculum. They receive a school tour and have the opportunity to ask questions. Parents workshops are provided on transitioning to Pre-K and/Kindergarten. A social worker is assigned to each school to provide additional strategies for staff and parents on handling the socio/emotional stages children encounter. Pamphlets. Teachers will be provided with books to read to students, such as Getting Ready for Kindergarten. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. We have an assessment team that decided MOSL responsibility. Grade teams meet to review curriculum and assessments. Teachers complete annual goal s and meet with administration to discuss goals and needed support. The PD directly reflects the needed support as well as areas noted in observations. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) X X Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Federal Federal 255,551 160,209 X X 1  Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Local 0 0 1,934,072 0 0 X 0 0 X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the 2  participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 3  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 221K, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students P.S.221 will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 4  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), 5  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 221, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; 6  ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents 7  ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 8  ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 9  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 17 School Name Toussaint L'Ouverture Borough Brooklyn School Number 221 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Clara Moodie Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Patricia Nicome-Lendore Teacher/Subject Area Yolande Edwards/Math Teacher/Subject Area J. Scott/Writing Related-Service Provider Adele Ming Superintendent Clarence Ellis Assistant Principal Ida Phillip Coach type here School Counselor Sheila London Parent Jackie Layne Parent Coordinator Philton Lewis Field Support Center Staff Member Soeurette C. Fougere Other (Name and Title) Marie Bastien C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 361 0 Total number of ELLs 25 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 6.93%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Paste response to questions here: This year we are using DRA2, baseline assessments in Ela and math. Our school uses NYSESLAT, periodic assessment, Nysitell and teacher designed assessments. The data is analyzed to determine the strengths and weaknesses of the student. A collaborative process takes place between classroom teachers, service providers and the ESL teacher. Based on the needs we develop instructional goals and the cousre of study that will be designed and differentiated to serve the academic, social, and emotional needs of each student. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 1  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Paste response to question here: We examine growth based on nyseslat, DRA2, teacher made assessments and tasks. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Paste response to question here: When the data identifies a student as being deficient in an area, the students is recommended for additional support in that area. It can be provided during the intervention period, small group instruction or after-school.. The students will be provided with appropriate entry points to meet their needs. This includes comparing different forms of instruction, designing context embedded instruction ;designing effective individual programs and increasing education opportunities. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Paste response to question here: Significant data is not available at this time. The results of the ELL assessment are used in planning intervention, reinforcement of advance work as indicated. This will be done during the intervention period and guided reading. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Paste response to questions here: Our freestanding ESL program services the English language learners. Students are categorized based on their English proficiency levels --- entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding and proficient. The entering and emerging level students receive 360 minutes of ESL instruction per week and the transitioning and expanding level students receive 180 minutes of ESL instruction per week and 180 minutes ELA. The proficient level students receive 90 minutes of support in ENL/ELA or core subjects. We use a combination of pull-out and push-in programs. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? 2  a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Paste response to questions here: The ESL teacher's schedule ensures that the mandated number of instructional minutes are provided as per CR Part 154: students in Grades K-5 performing at the entering and emergent levels on the NYSESLAT will receive 360 minutes (2 units) of ESL instruction per week. Students performing at transitioning and expanding level of proficiency will receive 180 minutes (1 unit) of ESL instruction per week and 180 minutes of ELA. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Paste response here: Our ESL program provides students with access to English Language development, comprehensive literacy instruction and standard-based content area information. The ESL teacher and the classroom teachers work collaboratively to ensure the smooth transition between the ESL classroom and the mainstream classroom with the Reading/Language Arts Block. The balanced literacy workshop model is used in the ESL classroom, so that collaboration can be achieved within the students’ mainstream classrooms. We apply ESL strategies for the development of listening, speaking, reading and writing skills for ELL’s. Activities include visual aids to model and reinforce the language; cooperative groups to work on the projects and to fulfill tasks; role-play and presentations, etc. The students have the opportunities to work independently and cooperatively. Our ELL students demonstration strength in the modalities of listening and speaking. Therefore we use their strength to enhance Instruction • Materials are chosen to meet the challenges of language and literacy learning. • Focus is placed on thematic topics, word study and tailors them to suit the students’ appropriate stages of language acquisition. • Provide students with simultaneous accesses to English oral language, literacy and standards-based content area material. • Use workshop model bridging phonics, chants, songs with reading aloud, shared reading, guided reading and content area activities. • The instructions, reflecting Language Experience Approach, should be contextualized and supported by ESL strategies such as modeling, bridging, text-representation, meta-cognition, gesturing, restating, acting, audio-visual, real-world objects. • Standardized and teacher-made assessments are given for data collection in order to adjust the teaching and learning strategies. All students are addressed: The main focus in the literacy program is to have all children reading on or above grade level. To implement this, the school will: • Adhere to 120 minute literacy block • Use the Balanced Literacy Model of Reading and Writing work • Provide a resource for ELL students - they are included in AIS and after-school academics • Provide AIS services for grades 3, 4, and 5. • Provide professional development for teachers • Provide parent workshops • Increase classroom libraries 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Paste response to question here: Teachers at P 221K provide native language support to ELL students and make sure they are apporpriately evaluated in their native languages throughout the year. The majority of our ELL students have home language of Spanish . A pedagogue who speaks the student's native language assists for interpretation and translation during evaluation, including student testing, collecting communication samples and communicating with the student's parents. However we do not have a bilingual program. 3  5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Paste response to questions here: SIFE ELLS that have experienced interrupted formal instruction are provided with all of the regular strategies and skills needed for language acquisition. However, special care is given in assessing their skills and providing a variety of enriching experiences. I.E. trips, photos, stories, vocabulary and oral history. Materials that are high interest and low vocabulary are provided. build up their area of weakness which is writing. Plans for New Comers: *Teachers are encouraged to have positive attitudes towards the new comers. Teachers have to understand that the new comers possess a wealth of knowledge and personal experiences. They are not blank slates. Teachers must embrace the culture and experiences of the students and use them as stepping stones to facilitate a smooth transition. •Teachers must allow the new comers to interact and participate in various activities. Group the new comers properly, taking their English language proficiency, home language and age into consideration. At the beginning stages, teachers should allow students to be silent or assign non-threatening tasks. They should create ample opportunities for new comers to listen to the English language and encourage them to try to use it. Plans for Long Term ELLS: We assessed the students by their performance, portfolios, class work and test results. We plan to build a profile for each student and locate the problems and work on them. A review of these assessments show a trend, most of our long-term ELLS are weak in writing, which has a lot to do with their weakness in vocabulary and comprehension, lack of knowledge of the English language syntax, convention and culture. These skills will be taught explicitly. For these long-term ELLS, we will develop a schedule to provide individual conferencing. Transition Plan for Students Reaching Proficiency •Technically, when students reach the proficiency level, they are no longer entitled to services. However, because of the language factors, they are still not as proficient as their fellow students. They often need support. Our school allows them one additional year in the ESL program. These students are still granted their former test accomodations for the additional year. We set up one hour a week for them to attend the ESL program to work on the areas that are experiencing difficulties. They are also included in the Title III after-school program and Saturday academic program .•Classroom teachers and subject teachers are informed about these students. They are advised to give more support in their teaching. Classroom teachers are encouraged to have periodic meetings with the ESL teacher. •Parents are encouraged to attend workshops on ways to help their children. 4  English Language Arts: Our ELLS receive an additional 180 minutes of English language arts provided by their classroom teacher. They are included in the literacy block which has a balanced literacy approach. The workshop model is emphasized. This includes mini-lessons, read alouds, shared reading, guided reading, word study and conferencing. Strategies are also used with content area material. Classroom teachers and the ESL teacher colloborates to ensure that of ELL student receive the needed test accomodations that are indicated in the ATS report. Scheduling and translation/interpretation support is provided as needed. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Paste response to question here: We strive to provide opportunities that are multi-sensory and kinisthetic in nature. In order to provide challenging educational experiences that are meaningful and contextual, our ELL students will use materials that have differentiated tasks to match their cognitive abilities (adapted books, classroom multi-cultural libraries), instructional materials that are aligned with the school’s core curriculum, and literature that reflect a variety of native languages to suppot our ELLs. Native language support is provided where necessary – such as using bilingual dictionaries, native classroom libraries, technology enrichments in the native language are available in our freestanding ESL program. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Paste response to question here: P221K staff uses curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable diverse ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency. The educators have a clear vision that includes high expectations for ELL student achievement supported by a purposeful plan of action. All teachers work collaboratively. The ESL teacher also participates in meetings alongside content teachers. Teachers meet twice a week with a purpose of looking at a student work (ELLs-SWD inclusive) in order to discuss their academic and language performance in content areas and design new performance tasks and/or instructional strategies aligned with CCLS that address students’ needs and foster their performance growth. Students are placed in content classes according to academic ability whenever possible. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Paste response to question here: This year P221K will continue to use intervention programs for ELL students in ELA, math, and other content areas. Our school instructional approach is based on the premise that English is best acquired within content, across all content areas. All content-area teachers are ELA teachers in addition to their disciplines. Professional Development for teachers is strategically designed to support this premise. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Paste response to question here: There aren't any new programs for the current school year. However, we will be working to deepen our understanding of present progarms: Ready Gen - A language Arts program based on decoding skills, oral language, vocabulary development and comprehension. Go Math - A mathematical program based on lessons designed to facilitate conceptual development, as the students master each content standard in the common core. The students will use manipulatives, models, pictures and symbols to deepen understanding. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 5  Paste response to question here:We did not discontinue any programs. However, we are looking forward for a new ESL teacher bringing new strategies and skills to help our ELL's achieve. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Paste response to question here: ELLs are afforded equal access to all programs school-wide. They participate in our music program, Urban Voices or Music on the Brain. They are also invited to participate in our district basketball team. Our ELL students receive supplemental services including speech, occupational therapy and physical therapy as needed. They are invited or mandated to participate in our extended day program, test prep and Saturday academy when in session. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Paste response to question here: The use of technology is incorporated to give students instructional support across all content areas. ESL materials will be infused throughout all aspects of instruction for all ELL subgroups. Content teachers and the ESL teacher actively incorporate the technology (overhead projectors, computers, software) approach in delivering instructions to students as well as in creating a variety of engaging grade-and-age appropriate hands-on/minds-on materials to be used for differentiated instruction and formative assessment. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Paste response to question here: P221K has a Free-standing ESL program. Native Language support is delivered in our school through setting up classroom libraries that offer a variety of books on all levels with the reflection on the students’ diverse backgrounds, their native languages, special needs and strengths of our ELL students. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Paste response to question here: 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Paste response to question here: The use of technology is incorporated to give students instructional support across all content areas. ESL materials will be infused throughout all aspects of instruction for all ELL subgroups. Content teachers and the ESL teacher actively incorporate the technology (overhead projectors, computers, software) approach in delivering instructions to students as well as in creating a variety of engaging grade-and-age appropriate hands-on/minds-on materials to be used for differentiated instruction and formative assessment. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Paste response to question here: The required service support and resources correspond to ages and grades of P221K ELL students. The instructional materials used to aid ELLs are provided in accordance with their age, grade, and proficiency levels. In the classroom teachers work with our ELL students to provide various entry points to meet the needs of the ELL students to better comprehend the material. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Paste response to question here: Currently we do not offer any language electives at P221K. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? 6  d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Paste response to question here: A. The ESL teacher will attend a series of professional development workshops throughout the year provided by the District ELL and Literacy Offices. She will share newly acquired professional ideas and information regarding teaching ELLs with classroom and content area teachers during the (Collaborative Teacher Team) meetings that provide additional opportunities for teachers to improve their instructional practice in terms of ELLs. The ESL teacher will keep abreast of the CCLS. She is included in staff trainings and participates in team meetings. B. The ESL teacher will attend several PD workshops focused on CCLS: November - Analysis of State ELA and Math assessments - What standards are being meet by our ELL students? What standards do we need to focus on. December - Close reading - how does it deepen understanding C. There are ongoing collaborative meetings for classroom, content, and ESL teachers to discuss student progress, case studies and inquiries. During these meetings, discussions evolve around curriculum, differentiating lesson activities and adoption of curriculum to meet all students’ needs (including ELLs) as they transition from elementary to middle. D. The Professional Development plan for our teachers and personnel will include Jose P. Training conferences and workshops that highlight effective teaching practices by applying the 6 key strategies of teaching a second language that can be utilized in the classroom. Our non-ELL teachers will register for a Jose P. Training sessions through DOE and Network in order to fulfill NYS requirement for ESL training. Non-ESL teachers will learn the history of the litigation which became the means to providing students with language backgrounds other than English with equal access to learning and will be exposed to theories of first and second language acquisition, ESL methodologies past and present, and will experience hands-on practice in the approaches and strategies used to foster second language acquisition. At the end of the sessions, teachers will receive certificates that will be kept in their teachers’ files at school. Paste response to question here: Professional development is provided that includes the importance of scaffolding to provide various entry points for each lesson. The literacy programs chosen stress the need and importance of vocabulary development, teachers are shown strategies to incorporate in the lesson. Manipulatives and other hands-on experiences are demonstrated to staff to incorporate. We offer inter-visitations to demonstrate the use of strategies. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Paste response to question here: The guidance counselor invites the parent and student in along with providing a translator where needed to review the middle school process. The interests and concerns of both the Parent and student are addresssed. Individual schools are discussedbased on resources and classes offered. Paste response to question here: The ESL teacher attends professional develoment provided by the district and outside organizations. She inturn serves as a turnkey person providing strategies and skills to staff. Our assist Principals , literacy,math and language representative also provide instruction to support our ELL's Our focus this year is to improve questioning and discusions and to determine how will can weeffect the ELL students achievement. Workshops have been provided in the components of balanced literacy, shared reading, read alouds, guided reading, independent reading, modeling writing and 7  many more. We are also iassisting staff in understanding the Nyseslat and other assessments. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Paste response to question here: Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. Our school leaders, the Parent Coordinator, Mr. Lewis, and faculty communicate high expectations for all students and partner with families to support student progress. Parents of are ELL's are invited to all parent workshops. Letters are send home in their native language where needed. Specific workshops are arranged to address the needs of our ELL parents and students. To support home-school relationships and improve communication with parents, including parents of our English Language Learners and students with disabilities, our school provides the following: Conducts parent-teacher conferences three times during which the individual child’s achievement is discussed; Tuesdays arealso used toarrange additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., afternoons, morning, evening and provides (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; Respects the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; We used bi-lingual staff, call in translation services as well as vendor when necessary. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Paste response here: A log is keep of all visitations,letters and calls. A log is keep of all visitations,letters and calls. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 8 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Clara Moodie-kirkland, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 9  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Stephanie Martin Title Principal Florentine Ulysse Assistant Principal Delmira Henry Parent Coordinator Patricia Nicome-Lendore ENL/Bilingual Teacher Jackie Layne Parent Michelle Haynesworth Teacher/Subject Area J. Scott/Writing Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Sheila London School Counselor Clarence G. ellis Soeurette C. Fougere Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member ELL Service Coordina Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 1/1/01 0  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 17K221 School Name: Toussaint L'Ouverture Superintendent: Clarence Ellis The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. In accordance with Section VII of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and Parents’ Bills of Rights and Responsibilities, P221K has established the procedures for ensuring that the parents of ELL students are provided with meaningful opportunity to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education. Our school’s LAP team maintains database regarding our students’ primary language and whether their parents require language assistance to communicate effectively with the school’s and DOE offices. Currently we have students from four (4) language groups (Spanish, Haitian-Creole, Bosnian, and Twi). 1  P221K uses a variety of methods to identify language needs of parents in order to ensure that all parents are provided with appropriate and timely information on educational programs and opportunities of their children in a language they can understand. An initial determination of the child’s home language is made by the ESL teacher or the school’s in-take group through administering Home Language Identification Survey to a parent during the registration process. The Home Language Identification Survey forms are available in many languages. The information from the Home Language Identification Survey is provided to the school pupil accounting secretary who will enter the data into ATS. Home Language Identification Surveys are kept in students’ files at school. We also refer to ATS reports for initial identification of home languages other than English. In addition, the information on parent language needs can be collected directly from parents or guardians during parent meetings, parent conferences, IEP meetings, and other school-wide parent activities. The pupil accounting secretary maintains a list of foreign-language speaking homes so that when a memorandum is distributed, she can ensure that translated versions are provided via the office of ELLs, school main office, or/and The Translation and Interpretation Unit. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language A review of the home language forms along with information from teachers has assisted us in determining that we presently need support in the following languages: Spanish, Creole, and Barbama. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2  Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The documenrs required to be translated for further distribution to families are: parent-teacher annual announcements, the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent-Compact, after-school program information, newsletters, NYS testing dates, letters from the school leadership, school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? P.S. 221K staff meets with parents on a regular basis throughout the school year: an initial orientation for parents of ELLs, Language Proficiency Team meetings, four (4) evening Parent -Teacher Conferences and additional two (2) during the daytime, an Annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference prior December 1st, IEP meetings, family events/activities throughout the school year, School Leadership Team meetings, Parent-Teacher Association meetings. The school holds face-to-face meetings and phone calls with teachers, guidance counselors, school psychologists, school nurses, and/or other school staff regarding critical information about students' academic, social and behavioral development and health. An assisstance from qualified interpreters and translators is provided in a form, and a language that parents can understand. 3  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) To accomplish the school plan of assistance for our ELLs’ parents, our school’s LAP team will make every effort to fulfill Section VII of Chancellor’s Regulations A-663 regarding parental notification requirement translation and interpretation services by reducing language barriers according to our plan: 1. We will assess the language needs of ELLs parents/guardians. 2. We will establish an in-house interpretation unit to provide language assistance to parents speaking languages other than English. 3. We will provide parents access to the Parents' Guide to Language Access and Language ID Guides located in the main office along with their children's educational options. 4. We will inform parents of ELLs about their rights regarding translation and interpretation services in their native languages and English and instruct them on how to obtain these services in accordance with the Parents' Bill of Rights. 5. We will post Interpretation Notice signs and Safety Plans Procedures near the school entrance in home languages and English telling parents where a copy of such written notification can be obtained. 6. We will translate all necessary documents in a timely manner. 7. We will provide oral interpretation services during parent-teacher conferences, parent meetings, etc. 8. We will provide assistance to parents on how to use the NYC DOE web site and other valuable resources. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 4  The P. S. 221K school administration distributes the annual school survey and feedback forms to parents of all students, including parents of ELLs, in order to gather their feedback on the quality and availability of services. Our school considers parents' needs and concerns so that to upgrade our programs and provide satisfying services for our students and their families. 5 
