 19K224 School Name: P.S. 224 HALE A. WOODRUFF Principal: ROCHELLE HINDS   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Hale A. Woodruff 331900010224 Pre-Kindergarten - 5 School Number (DBN): 19K224 755 Wortman Avenue Brooklyn NY 11208 718-235-3600 Phone Number: 718-827-4850 Fax: Rochelle Hinds Rhinds2@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Rochelle Hinds Terrance Bryant DiedraJones Juanita Walters N/A N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 19 Dr. Thomas McBryde Jr. Superintendent: 557 Pennsylvania Avenue Brooklyn NY 11207 Superintendent’s Office Address: TMcBrydeJr@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-240-2741 Phone Number: 718-240-2747 Fax: BrooklynNorth FSC: Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 131 Livingston Street Brooklyn, N.Y. 11207 BFitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718935-3592 Phone Number: 718 935-2382 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Rochelle Hinds Terrence Bryant DiedraJones Trisha Roberts n/a n/a n/a *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Gretchen Finke-Cassidy Janice McLean Juanita Walters Member/ UFT Member/ UFT Member/ UFT   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Dietra Jones Tiffany Youmans Latisha Gayle Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Technology and the arts will be infused in the school's common core aligned curriculum to enhance, engage, and stimulate learning for all students. Students will have the opportunity to explore their creative abilities and develop 21st century skills (communication, collaboration, creativity and critical thinking) to compete in a global economy.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS 224 Vision Statement It is our vision to provide students with a quality education, while using arts and technology as a vehicle for achieving academic excellence. At P.S. 224 we believe that every scholar deserves a quality education. Instruction follows a gradual release model from teachers to scholars. This begins with explicit instruction, guided practice with scholars which transfers to extended opportunities for independent practice where scholars work on task in groups and centers. Utilizing this model, results in authentic transfer where scholars apply skills and strategies to context with independence. Direct instruction is balanced with opportunities for inquiry, exploration and investigation over the course of units. We believe scholars should experience productive struggle, where they are challenged based on the cognitive demand of the assigned tasks. We have established our school wide definition of rigor. Rigor at P.S. 224 is to actively engage scholars in activities that promote cognitive challenge, collaborative discussions, and the use of text based evidence with targeted strategies to demonstrate perseverance and understanding of standards. Evidence of rigor is visible through a demonstrated understanding of instructional expectations, English Language Arts and Mathematics Instructional Shifts, ELA and Math performance units and tasks. Instructional Shifts are reflected in the following ways: Literacy:  Classroom libraries. Reading and writing genres reflect a balance of fiction and non-fiction texts Scholars build knowledge about the world by engaging with fiction and non fiction texts during  independent reading and guided reading. Scholars have daily access to grade level texts through shared reading, read aloud, close reading and independent reading Scholars utilize text to engage in discussion and respond to written task using text based evidence to demonstrate understanding of literacy standards   Academic vocabulary is infused into lesson and unit planning Math:  Participation in the Generation Ready series has supported PS 224’s integration of the instructional shifts. The partnership has allowed teachers to make strategic decisions around the curriculum. Topics and units have been altered for grade level alignment and cohesion. Our curriculum maps have been modified to include tasks and exploration of concepts to ensure deeper understanding and opportunities for exploration.  Our Go Math curriculum exposes scholars to Common Core aligned tasks. Teachers have a wide array of resources that assist them in differentiating their lessons to meet scholars at varied proficiency levels. Additionally, resources are provided to further explain concepts when a teacher needs clarification. Go Math focuses on fewer concepts (less volume), so there is a concentration on specific grade-level standards. Conceptual understanding in mathematics is an important element of the learning process. It engages scholars in explaining their thinking. We have provided teachers with pointed professional learning specific to the “Launch, Explore, Share” model with usage of the Go Math curriculum, disaggregation of mathematics data and strategies to solve problems based on certain strands, as well as plan for focused and in depth instruction.  We began transitioning to EngageNY for resources to support dual intensity and fluency in mathematics To date, we have noticed the following impact: 0   With building teacher capacity around scholar center learning, there has been an increase in teacher use of  the gradual release model. Teachers explicit teach and model for scholars before independent practice. Scholars utilizing text to engage in discussion and respond to written task using text based evidence to demonstrate understanding of literacy standards Instructional shifts incorporated in ELA and math   Teacher teams utilize data to differentiate instruction PS 224 Highlights Guided Reading Lab In support of our instructional focus (Scholars will utilize text to engage in discussion and respond to written tasks using text-based evidence to demonstrate understanding of literacy standards) and our CEP goal pertaining to rigorous Instruction, (By June 2019, 90% of scholars in grades K-5 will improve reading comprehension and literacy proficiency by moving at least three levels as measured by Fountas and Pinnell running records.) we have created and maintained a functional guided reading lab. The room consist of $26,000 dollars worth of Scholastic guided reading books for grades K-5. Teachers utilize the lab daily to chose level books for scholars they support during guided reading. Guided reading is conducted 3x during the week for all grades. Teacher Data Meetings The instructional cabinet (administrators, and teachers) meet to discuss curricula, student data, and professional development needs. Additionally, monthly data meetings, engagement in dialogue about academics, as well as social and emotional progress. These meetings focus on highlighting students who are proficient, below grade level, and above grade level as evidenced by current writing, mathematics, and reading data – suggestions for improvement in students’ achievement is also discussed. Standard Based Maps As a school community we utilize data to tailor our standard based maps so that we address the needs of our scholars. Standard based maps are comprehensible documents that replicate the city-wide instructional shifts which are essential to the Common Core Learning Standards. Our Standard Based Maps were created with school consultant Dennis McKesey, so that scholars will be able to master grade level standards. Unlike our prior curricula maps, these maps allow teachers to focus specifically on the standards and not solely on curriculum resources. Teachers collaborate and plan lessons aligned to the standards to infuse rigor into interdisciplinary units. Teachers revisit standards at minimum 2x throughout the year. Response to Intervention (RTI) Team The Response to Intervention (RTI) Team is a collaborative group of teachers, 1 counselor, psychologist, social worker and administrators who meet periodically to discuss and document strategies for targeted students in Tier 2 and Tier 3. This team gathers all student data and makes decisions about intervention strategies most suitable for the whole child. Additionally, individualized programs have been designed for Students With Disabilities (SWD’s) to integrate students into content area classes based on student growth and achievement. Assembly Programs Scholars across all grade bends have opportunities to participate in monthly assembly programs. Each grade band engages in the infusion of the arts in alignment with pertinent social studies focus. Scholars participate in performances that include dance, poetry, singing, and or drama. These performances are in alignment with the speaking and listening Common Core Learning Standards. Furthermore, the performances aid in building student confidence, as well as their self-esteem. 1  My Brother’s Keeper/ Gem Girls/ Student Government Council (SGA) My Brother’s Keeper is designed for African American/ Latino boys in grades 4 and 5. This initiative helps shape the boys’ social and emotional well being. The facilitators have received specialized trainings from the District 19 office experts. The boys also are given mentors who they can use as positive support. The Gem Girls similarly offer an opportunity for the girls to convene and learn about issues that affect them, as well as social etiquette. Our SGA consist of the grade 5 senior class. Member meet twice a month to talk about issues concerning our school. They schedule fundraisers and community service that the scholars at PS 224 can participate in. Parent Teacher Association One of the most critical groups in our school community is the Parent-Teacher Association (PTA). PTA meetings are conducted on the first Friday of each month. The PTA President and the Parent Coordinator collaborate to ensure that families participate in monthly workshops and events. Some of the activities include Dads Bring Your Child to School, Thanksgiving Feast, CookShop, monthly assemblies, school dances and more. Parent participation is increasing.Parents will continue to receive information that will assist them in being even more equipped to support their children. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Currently, P.S. 224 serves approximately 118 special needs children, with students receiving services along a continuum within self-contained, Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT) and SETSS classes. Data from the last school year and indicators from the current school year reveal that students are not showing adequate yearly progress in reading and math. Furthermore, some students require more intensive support with socio-emotional concerns, and consistent intervention to address chronic behavior issues. Our School Improvement Team (SIT) focused on analyzing students' IEPs to ensure that students are properly identified, suitably matched to programs, and that there is clear alignment between present levels of performance, annual goals and related services. For the 2018-2019 school year, the SIT will continue to provide support in those areas in addition to providing professional development and ongoing guidance to teachers to ensure that students are receiving explicit instruction, that all students have access to the curriculum, and that teachers' instructional plan reflect specialized strategies which cater to the needs of all our students. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The most recent Quality Review (2017-2018) highlights indicator 3.4 -High Expectations as an area of celebration. The findings were, "School leaders exemplify high expectations by ensuring that there are embedded systems for team collaborations and by having clear expectations around planning and instruction. For example, school leaders modeled how to have collaborative meetings with teachers and gradually expected teachers to lead their own meetings. School leaders and teachers report having frequent meetings to examine student data using protocols and recording their findings in an online platform. School leaders are frequently reading notes of the meetings using the online platform and respond back with immediate feedback. Clear and high expectations are also communicated through staff memorandum and newsletters." Impact Ongoing communication and support by school leaders around classroom visits support teachers’ understanding and awareness of expectations regarding teaching and learning. 2  Communication from school leaders and teachers through a web application and newsletters provide frequent opportunities for families to understand student progress towards meeting standards. Area of focus: Teaching practices across classrooms are beginning to reflect alignment to the school’s beliefs of how students learn best; however, classroom activities and student discussions do not yet consistently align with the gradual release of responsibility in engaging in rigorous tasks and productive struggle that are the school’s key instructional foci. Our school quality review report and our learning environment survey reveals that QR indicator 1.2 is our key area of focus. According to our learning environment survey:  81% of teachers say that students feel challenged.  64% of teachers say that students have to work hard to do well.  32% of teachers say that students respond to challenging test questions.  31%of teachers say that students respond to challenging questions in class. 3  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 19K224 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 412 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 58 53 15 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 25 11 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 95.0% % Attendance Rate 92.2% % Reduced Lunch 7.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.0% 31.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.25 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 21.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 54% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 50 51 87.8% 2.7% 22.8% 64.1% 1.9% 1.7% 6 13% 8.4 13.8% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School’s strengths relative to this Framework element According to our Learning Environment Survey 82% of teachers feel that their students are challenged. Over the past school year teachers began to utilize standard based maps to align instruction to the CCLS. During this time they also differentiated lessons to meet the needs of learners in the classroom. Classrooms visits yield evidence of teachers working closely with students via mini lessons, discussions, and small groups. Teachers utilize technology to enhance the delivery of instruction and cognitively engage students. Continue to provide professional learning opportunities to strengthen pedagogy practices by utilizing the standards (before and after) to strategically plan lessons that will support and all learners in appropriate tasks that challenge and push student thinking. Priority Need While teachers are working diligently to perfect their craft, there is still a need to strengthen pedagogical practices across math instruction to yield proficient results on math benchmark assessments. We have shown growth, however, majority of our students fall in tier 3. Therefore, we will utilize EngageNY as a resource to support curriculum planning. Teachers will engage in scholars in differentiated instruction tailored to meet areas of need. As a follow up, the teacher and student will revisit focus standards to monitor progress. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through the implementation of Engage NY, 90% of students in grades 3-5 will improve math proficiency by moving at least one level as measured by SchoolNet. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will continue to dissect CCLS to align with the math curriculum. Teachers will continue to plan lessons incorporating the standards, EngageNY and the 5 pilllars for orchestrating discussion. Teachers will allow students to participate in differentiated groups to address students’ areas of growth and move students’ thinking and performance to higher levels. This will be evident in student discussion, activities, and writing performance . Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Students (K-5) October 2018-June 2019 Administrators, Grade Leaders, Teachers School-wide Initiatives All Students Khan Academy and Zearn will be used as intervention resources for math instruction. (K-5) Professional Learning Communities Instructional Staff Instructional staff (including related services) will meet during Monday PD time to gain a clear vision of instructional expectations and develop math strategies to improve student achievement. Relevant topics will include, but are not limited to: Key Shifts in Mathematics, CCLS alignment, Depth of knowledge and questioning, data driven instruction, differentiation including multiple intelligences and entry points. Extended Day Tutoring October 2018-June 2019 October 2018-June 2019 Administrators, Educational Assistants, Grade Leaders, Teachers Administrators, Grade Leaders, Teachers, Educational Assistants Students October 2018-June 2019 Administrators, Grade Leaders, Teachers After-school programs (New York Edge) will provide students in grades k-5 with enrichment in mathematics. Academic Intervention Services student AIS teachers will communicate with classroom teachers and provide students, who are in the lowest third in math, with additional practice and assistance with class content. Parent Instructional Walk-throughs Parents, Parents will have the opportunity to engage in 3 instructional math walks for the year to see how teachers and students are engaging in math instruction. Teachers, parents, all grades October 2018-June 2019 Administrators, Grade Leaders, Teachers October 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Teachers, Parents 6  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will have the opportunity to engage in 3 instructional math walks for the year to see how teachers and students are engaging in math instruction. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administration, School Leadership Team, Common planning, paraprofessionals, paraprofessional, Instructional Leaders, Consultants Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Teachers will conduct mid-year assessments (M.O.Y). as a form of progress monitoring to identify key components for ensuring the success towards meeting the school specified goals. This is not limited to but will include: ● Walk-through ● Mid year Unit assessments ● Portfolio checks ● Teacher observations and discussions with feedback ● Customized professional development workshops 50% of students should show growth by at least one math level to show that we are on track with the yearly goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) ● NYC Performance Task ● Portfolio checks 7  ● Teacher observations and discussions with feedback Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? During the 2017-2018 school year, P.S. 224’s attendance has decreased from 90% to 88% from the previous school year. More Specifically, the Early Childhood grades (Pre-K to 1) has the lowest attendance percentage rate with consistent absence and lateness. The Attendance Committee is usually comprised of administration, guidance counselor, school psychologist, parent coordinator, pupil accounting secretary, and the attendance teacher. In 2019 we have decided to extend the membership to teacher, (ESL, PE, AIS, Art), so that we can have an all hands-in approach to improving our attendance rate. The team meets monthly to review students attendance and serves as the primary point of contact for scholars who miss school. The team also contacts parents regarding scholar absences/lateness, meet with parents to discuss student attendance, conduct home visits to identify barriers and promote home-school connections, and serves as a resource for teachers and staff members who have scholars’ with chronic absences. The Attendance Committee’s priority is to improve and maintain high attendance rate throughout the entire school year. We plan to accomplish this with help through our partnership with HEM, the SASF after school program, and other school-wide initiatives. To accomplish this goal: our Attendance Committee Meetings will implement the following: -provide parent outreach through daily phone calls are made for absent and late scholars. - identify and monitor scholars with attendance concerns, such as chronic absences, lateness and truancy. - provide supports for those scholars with a history of poor attendance. - implement professional development training sessions for teacher and staff members on with attendance protocol and procedures such as ATS, Working Class List and updating forms on a daily basis. - analyze attendance data (i.e. attendance tracker) and use the information to align with scholars’ academic performance and progress. - support parent/guardians with counseling sessions of those scholars with a history of poor attendance 9  -provide incentives to those students who have shown improvement on their attendance from the previous term and/or year Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 5% increase in attendance as evidenced by monthly attendance reports. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). School Wide Initiative Hive Empowerment Movement (HEM) will be implemented to establish the behavioral supports and social culture needed for all students to achieve social, emotional and academic success. Attention will be focused on creating and sustaining primary (school-wide), secondary (classroom), and tertiary (individual) systems of support that improve results for all students by making targeted misbehavior less effective and to increase attendance. Response to Intervention Response to Intervention framework (RTI) to provide instruction and targeted intervention to improve student outcomes. This team meets bi-weekly to discuss students who have been identified. The discussion furthers into action taken for students whether it is special education services, counseling, or academic intervention services. Teachers submit data on students after 6-8 weeks of collected data. All students, teachers October 2018-June 2019 Administrators, Guidance Counselors, Social Workers, Psychologist, Teachers, School Based Support Team All students October 2018-June 2019 Administrators, Guidance Counselors, Social Workers, Psychologist, Teachers, Based Support Team Student Support All students, Conflict Resolution/Peer Mediation Training, Restorative Justice, Student Government, Career Day, Community Service and Volunteer opportunities that include all students, including our ELL and SWD subgroups. Targeted Boys and Girls October 2018-June 2019 Administrators, Guidance Counselors, Social Workers, Psychologist, Teachers, School Based Support Team Students' meet with staff members and are trained in various areas of community services. Students are utilized different times of the school day and for various events and functions. Grade 5 Student Government: Students voluntarily offer and provide a service to the school community with a focus on attendance Fifth grade students October 2018-June 2019 Administrators, Guidance Counselors, Social Workers, Psychologist, 1 G.E.M. Girl Mentoring Program: Girls will be mentored and will receive social and emotional support in order to enhance their educational experience. G.E.M girls will participate and spearhead events within the school community in order to uplift their school community. Third, Fourth and Fifth grade girls October 2018-June 2019 Attendance Awards and Incentives Program for Attendance: Students with the highest attendance rate for the month will receive recognition. The classes with the highest attendance rate will receive a pizza party for their achievement. The class holding the highest attendance from that group will be provided an extra Physical Education period for the week. All students October 2017-June 2018 Teachers, School Based Support Team Administrators, Guidance Counselors, Social Workers, Psychologist, Teachers, School Based Support Team Attendance Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Coordinator and teachers establish a welcoming environment and open communication between community and school. Teachers have the opportunity to meet with teachers every Tuesday from 2:20pm- 3:40pm. Parent Coordinator plans monthly workshops based on parent’s needs. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● School-wide ClassDojo Classroom Program ● “Respect for All”- grades Pre-K through 5 ● Career Day ● Schoolwide Assemblies Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2  The Attendance Team will conduct monthly meeting in order to determine the targeted students with chronic absence and lateness based on the following reports: RDAL (daily attendance report); RPAL (monthly perfect attendance report); and RISA (Individual student attendance history). Parents will receive counseling workshops on the correlation between attendance and academic achievement. P.S. 224 will provide parents and families with information about the importance of attendance as one of the primary prevention strategies to improve student achievement. Moreover, we will also introduce school-wide incentives to encourage students to strive for good or perfect attendance as well as the HEM initiative. These initiatives will be emphasized the following forms of parent outreach:  Open-house presentation to parent and families: Administration will provide a presentation to parents attending the school’s fall and spring open house. The presentation will summarize the risk factors associated with chronic absenteeism, note the resources available at the school to improve attendance, and describe the risks associated with attendance.  Monthly Newsletters/Class Dojo/ Messenger The contents of the presentation given to parents during the open house will be presented in an “Attendance Matters” section within the school newsletter. The newsletter will be going in the scholar’s backpack at the beginning of each month. Additionally, parents will receive daily text notifications from their child’s classroom teacher on student academic performance, attendance and behavioral intervention.  School-wide incentive program along with Hive Empowerment Movement (HEM) Scholars with perfect attendance will be highlighted on bulletin boards and will receive a certificate, pencils, and other incentives. Additionally, the top three classes with the highest class attendance percentages will also receive incentives as well as an honorable mention during our daily morning motivation announcements and HEM assemblies. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance Committee Meetings are conducted to ensure our scholars regularly attend school to ensure academic growth. Parent outreach is essential for the home-school connection, therefore, daily phone calls are made for absent and late scholars. The school will use a variety of communication measures (e.g. parent meetings, phone calls, letters, etc.) to connect with parents. These form of communication will occur as scholar’s acquire two or more days of absences from school. -Two days absent - Phone call - Parent will receive a phone call from the school’s teacher indicating that the scholar missed two days of school. -Five days absent - Phone call and letter - Parent will receive a phone call and letter from the school explaining that the scholar has missed five days of school and reminding the parent of the importance of regular school attendance. -Seven days absent-Phone call, certified letter, and meeting - Parent will receive a phone call from the school informing them that their child has missed seven days of school. A certified letter will be sent home form the 3  school requiring that the parent meet with school administration and/or guidance counselor to discuss supports that can be provided to facilitate improved attendance as part of the school’s attendance policy. -Ten days absent - Home Visit- The attendance teacher will conduct a home visit to meet with the scholar’s parent, assess barriers/challenges, and develop a plan to improve the scholar’s attendance. ATS (Automate the Schools) daily and monthly reports will provide a vital data source to identify , monitor, and evaluate the absenteeism and truancy reduction effort at PS224. Administration and the Attendance Committee will gather the following reports to identify the following:  The total number of days absent for each scholar enrolled throughout the school year.  The number of parent notifications sent  The number of parental meetings held to discuss student attendance  The number of phone calls made to inform parents about their child’s attendance. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School’s Strength relative to this Framework element Findings All teachers engage in structured professional collaborations using inquiry protocols to implement the Common Core and consistently analyze assessment data and student work. (QR 2017-2018) Impact Collaborative teacher work promotes the achievement of school goals, strengthens the instructional capacity of teachers to identify gaps in learning, and is focused on improved student learning. (QR 2017-2018) Teachers engage in weekly horizontal teacher teams focused on collaboratively planning lessons and units, strengthening teaching practices, looking at student work products for evidence of learning and gaps, and make purposeful adjustments to increase student achievement through purposeful use of data. Teachers also participate in ongoing professional development in literacy to support teachers with customizing instruction to provide students with rigorous and engaging learning activities. We will continue to develop common core aligned rubrics by teachers and students to assess and revise student work products in writing. Teachers also use of grade level complex texts during whole group instruction to explicitly teach students how to negotiate language features, structure, layout, purpose and meaning and knowledge demands of information and fiction texts. These features of complex texts are utilized during guided reading, close reading, shared reading and read aloud to engage all students in discussions and inferential thinking requiring text based evidence. Priority need(s) Teachers need to explicitly align their lessons to standard based maps. With two common planning preps during the week, administration will continue to mandate and supervise that one of the common planning period is dedicated to modifying standard based maps and lesson planning. Teachers will also identify next steps for the implication of their work within the next week. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 5  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all grade level teacher teams will utilize coherent protocols and student data to create standard based maps and cohesive lesson plans resulting in 95% of teachers aligning their lessons to grade-level expectations as evidenced by quality of student work and observation ratings in Advance. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will collaborate in teacher teams 1x per week to modify standard based maps and to plan differentiated lessons aligned to the CCLS to address the needs of all students, including our ELL and SWD students. Grade Level Teacher Teams Oct 2018-June 2019 Administrators Grade Leaders Teachers will meet 2x per month to discuss what worked and what still needs work based on previous next steps using student work products of targeted students. All information about student data and next steps will be found with the teacher team meeting minutes. Professional Learning Community Professional Learning Calendar for the 2018-2019 school year relies on information provided by surveys, teacher interest and need as notes in their Advance observations and feedback sessions. Therefore, instructional staff will meet during Monday PD to gain a clear vision of instructional expectations and develop instructional strategies to improve teacher practice. Grade Level Teacher Teams Oct 2018-June 2019 Administrators Grade Leaders Instructional Staff September 2018-June 2019 Administrators, Professional Development Committee, outside providers Administration will visit classrooms to observe implementation of next steps. Inter-visitations, Learning Walks, weekly team meetings, cabinet meetings, administrative meetings, etc. All Staff November 2018-June 2019 Administrators, Professional Development Committee, outside providers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Coordinator and teachers establish a welcoming environment and open communication between community and school. Teachers have the opportunity to explain and clarify assessments, and data analysis, where parents are given the opportunity to access and discuss their student’s progress every Tuesday from 2:20pm- 3:40pm Parent Coordinator plans monthly workshops based on parent’s needs. 7  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Title 1 SWP Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By November 2018, our school administration will complete 4 full day instructional walks  By December 2018, administration will observe implementation within each classroom of specific strategies and/or following protocols or procedures presented during each PD during weekly walk-through, informal and formal observations and monthly conferences.  By January 2019, cycle one of professional learning will be complete. Professional learning will improve student achievement as evident by Fountas and Pinnel reading levels and performance based interim assessments   By January 2019, discussions will take place with teachers in regards to class data, grade data and comparison to school data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher Level and School Level MOTP Detail and Summary Reports; Teacher Level MOSL selection reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Effective Leadership is the element in which the school has made the most progress. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide:  100% of teachers say that the principal sets high standards for student learning.  96% of teachers say that the principal sets clear expectations for teachers about implementing what they have learned in professional development.  96%of teachers say that the principal makes clear to the staff her expectations for meeting instructional goals.  96% of teachers say that the principal communicates a clear vision for this school. (Q11b)  93% of teachers say that the principal carefully tracks student academic progress. (Q11f) Priority Need According to the 2017-2018 Quality Review Report, the school needs to continue to develop in QR indicator 1.2- Pedagogy. Based on ELA assessment data, teacher observations, 2017-2018 school quality guide, and Quality Review results we have determined that pedagogy is our priority focus for our staff. We must work to enhance Tier 1 instruction and improve academic performance for all students including ELLs, SWDs, and at risk students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of classroom teachers will engage in meaningful professional development experiences to enhance Tier 1 instruction and improve academic performance for all students including ELLs, SWDs, and at risk students as evidenced by an increase in student achievement on interim assessments. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? School leaders will consistently communicate high expectations (professionalism, instruction, communication, and other elements of the Danielson Framework for Teaching) to the entire staff, and provide training, resulting in a culture of mutual accountability for those expectations. All staff September 2018-June 2019 Administrators Grade Leaders School leaders will engage in monthly data talks with teachers about target scholars Teachers Framework For Teaching components 1e (Design Coherent Instruction), 3c (Student Engagement) and 3d (Assessment) will be addressed in-depth during our professional learning opportunities. Teachers October 2018-June 2019 October 2018-June 2019 Administrators Administrators Grade Leaders Teachers will incorporate FFT best practices in component 1e, 3c, and 3d with specified strategies to meet the needs of all subgroups. School leaders will implement observation schedules Teachers Teacher and paraprofessionals share, analyze and discuss student data consistently in order to adapt curriculum and lessons according to the student’s needs, including our ELL and SWD students. Strategic Professional Development opportunities for targeted teachers to engage in meaningful learning around quality instruction and develop "Look Fors" for effective Tier 1 instruction 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All Students October 2018-June 2019 October 2018-June 2019 Administrators Administrators Teachers Administrators Teachers October 2018-June 2019 Administrators Grade Leaders PD Team 0  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Coordinator and teachers establish a welcoming environment and open communication between community and school. Teachers have the opportunity to explain and clarify assessments, and data analysis, where parents are given the opportunity to access and discuss their student’s progress every Tuesday from 2:20pm- 3:40pm Parent Coordinator plans monthly workshops based on parent’s needs. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Principal, Asst. Principals, the School Leadership Team (SLT), grade leaders, data specialist, school counselors, SAT, paraprofessionals, External support staff including consultants. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018 the administrator’s team will conduct midpoint benchmarks for each teacher as follows:  Portfolio Reviews  Analyze Progress of Mid-Year Assessments  Mid-Year Compliance Review School leaders will also meet with every teacher to conduct monthly data talks to talk about progress made. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher/School Level MOTP Summary Reports; Pre/Post Assessments; Teacher Conference Notes Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School climate has bearing on attendance rates, academic achievement and graduation rates. Research has shown that regardless of socioeconomic status, scholars in a positive school climate will helps scholars to develop the social and emotional skills they will need to become productive members of society. For the 2018- 2019 school year we began the implementation of the Hive Empowerment Movement (HEM). The program promotes a safe, nurturing and respectful environment for all scholars throughout the school community. The HEM program is a reward based program that celebrates positive behavior and characteristics of scholars. As a result of our implementation we decreased our level 2 infraction. As evidenced in OORS we have decreased level 2 infractions by 72%. The program focuses on a three-Tiered Prevention supports. Attention will be focused on creating and sustaining the Tiered 1 Primary Prevention through such school-wide initiatives as monthly assemblies, Parent/Teacher/Scholar celebration and correspondents. Classes (Tier 2) and individual scholars (Tier 3) will be rewarded with “Bee Points” for various reasons (e.g. walking the halls quietly, being a monitor in the cafeteria, answering a question in class, etc.). Scholars will be awarded for promoting positive interactions in the school community and the showcased practices of the 4-Bee's (Bee Respectful, Safe, Responsible, and the best that you can BEE!) The HEM team will provide outreach to parents of those identified with crisis concerns. ClassDojo text messages and periodic phone calls will take place weekly. The team will meet bi-weekly to discuss patterns and trends. By February 2019, the team will indicate progress toward meeting the goal. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all parents will be offered the opportunity to participate in monthly HEM assemblies as measured by attendance sheets and parent feedback results. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Promote student attendance at Hive Empowerment Movement (HEM) awards assemblies. Parents will engage in parent workshops through continuous communication with school community personnel. Communication to parents will include newsletters, auto messenger, school website, emails, fliers, and announcements. Back to School events will be opened to the entire school community and student volunteers will assist. Special Assemblies will enhance our school culture by including the entire school community. Finally, Family Fridays will help us to create the social, emotional and academic school environment that promotes learning. Parent Coordinator and teachers establish a welcoming environment and open communication between community and school. Parents have the opportunity to meet with teachers every Tuesday from 2:20pm- 3:40pm to discuss their child’s social, emotional, and academic performance and progress. Parent Coordinator plans monthly workshops based on parent’s needs. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents Grades K-5 September 2018- June 2019 Administrators, Teachers Guidance Counselor Parent Coordinator Teachers Parents September 2018-June 2019 Administration, Parent Coordinator, Teachers, Parents All Parents September 2018- June 2019 Administration, Parent Coordinator, Teachers If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. New York Edge formerly known as SASF. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administration, School Leadership committee, Parent Coordinator, Teachers, Parent Association, Data Specialist, School Counselors, Community and network supports. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 3  X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-point benchmarks will be as follow By September 2017- February 2018, their will be a 50% increase of parents attending Parent Teacher Conferences as evidenced by parent sign in sheets and parent communication log Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent Attendance Sheets at events, parent communication log, PTA attendance, learning environment survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Fountas & Pinell Running records scores for fluency and comprehension; NYS ELA exam scores; teacher-created assessments from Journeys and Expeditionary Learning programs; Waterford Early Learning performance data. NYS Math exam scores; Go Math unit assessments; ST Math progress monitoring; teacher-created assessments. Teacher created assessments; Common Core assessment results. Teacher created assessments; Common Core assessment results. Number of years receiving AIS services, hold-over students, chronic absence, lateness; repeated academic Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Wilson/Fundations program strategies; interactive read-alouds; shared reading/writing, partner reading; independent reading with leveled readers; choral reading. Go Math problem of the day; guided practice; independent practice, use of manipulatives, repeated math steps Cooperative learning; station teaching; center activities, mini projects. Cooperative learning; station teaching; center activities, exit projects Peer mediation, conflict resolution, classroom presentations, self-esteem intervention, problem-solving, Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day; after-school Small group instruction; focused one-to-one instruction, guided reading/writing; interactive software, scaffolding. During the school day; after-school. Small group instruction; focused one-to-one instruction, interactive software, scaffolding. Interdisciplinary teaching, cooperative learning groups During the school day; after-school. Interdisciplinary teaching, cooperative learning groups During the school day; after-school. Group meetings; one-on-one sessions. During the school day; after-school. 5  failure; poor socio-emotional skills, disciplinary record; students in temporary housing. anger management, critical thinking activities, Respect for All program, Life Skills program. 6  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 50 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Basic /emergency supplies such as uniforms school supplies; educational support services, counseling services; etc. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 7  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 8  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. The building leader ensures that all teacher certifications are current and that teachers participate in differentiated professional development to enhance pedagogy. Teachers are reminded via email to update professional paperwork and attend webinars, and workshops to ensure they are current with PD hours and certifications. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Several teams meet (Collaborative Inquiry, Curriculum Team, and Professional Development Committee) to ensure that teachers are involved in the process of choosing assessments for their students as well as workshops that support the needs of the teachers. Teachers submit feedback forms and surveys at the completion of workshops to evaluate and provide input on each session. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a 9  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Pre-school children and their parents/guardians are involved in various workshops, and information sessions to make the transition to kindergarten fluid. The parent coordinator, support staff and administration work closely with the Pre-kindergarten Social Worker to customize sessions and workshops to best suit the needs of the students. The students are periodically assessed to monitor social, emotional and academic progress. The parents receive quarterly progress reports and encouraged to have face to face meetings with teachers and paraprofessionals. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers are selected for a MOSL team which determines the assessments that are suitable for the school based on population, staff and curriculum. There is a teacher representative for each grade as well as the intervention, SETTS and ELL teachers. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 371,861 213,312 0 12,366 2,581,034 x X X x 0 Column B Section Reference(s) 4,5,6,7,8 4,5,7 4,5,7  1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated: 1   Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 224, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 224 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 3  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 4  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 224 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 5  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 6  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 7  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 8  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 9  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 0  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: All of our ELLs and immigrant scholars in grades 2-5 at PS224 will be invited to participate in the after school Title III Program, which will be facilitated by at least one licensed ESL/Bilingual teacher and two additional content area teachers provided for this purpose. English will be the medium of instruction for this after school program. Teachers will focus on improving the language acquisition of all scholars in the program. We will have 2 focused groups: Two groups of approximately 15 scholars each (grades 2-3, and second group grades 4-5). One Pedagogue will work with each group to instruct them in literacy and math. Approximately 12- 15 scholars will be assigned to each group and the program is slated to begin November 8, 2018 and run through April 30, (approximately 36 sessions). The program will take place every Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:30 PM to 4:30 PM. This school year, all of our newcomers in grades 3-5 tested at the entering level in all four domains- speaking, listening, reading and writing on the NYSITELL. Therefore, we will focus our instruction and learning activities on the development and enhancement of their English Acquisition in all four domains. Our newly arrived scholars who have no knowledge of the English language, will be provided with Bilingual Spanish/English materials such as, GOMATH exercise books in their language, Spanish trade books, Moving Into English text books, as well as access to our Mathletics online program and MyON ebooks. These materials will be utilized to help facilitate the development of our scholars' math and literacy skills. Analysis of the NYSESLAT 2018-2019 and ELA State Test 2018-2019 indicated that reading and writing are the lowest modalities among all our ELLS as well as our immigrant scholars. Therefore, our instructional focus and activities in this program will stress heavily on developing their reading and writing skills. Additionally, phonics, fluency , vocabulary and reading comprehension will be taught at all levels and as needed. One of our main goals for our scholars is to develop and foster a love for reading, while teaching various reading skills to enhance their speaking and reading comprehension. Curricula will be organized around “essential questions,” involve authentic reading and writing experiences, and provide textual choices, and meaningful content for scholars. We will use methodologies learned from Readers Workshop and RTI to enhance literacy skills, as well as content-area based materials aimed at exposing scholars to rich academic language. The teachers will select complex texts for read aloud during the mini-lesson. Through deconstruction and reconstruction of the complex texts, scholars will learn different literacy skills such as grammar, vocabulary, main idea, context clues, sequencing and characterization, as well as, content area knowledge. One of the most important steps in critical reading is to make predictions about a piece of writing prior to the first real reading. Activities to develop and facilitate this skill will include book walks/gallery walks, teacher modeling/think aloud, think/pair/share. During book walks, scholars are asked to preview the book (look at pictures/title/captions etc) before they read any text and make predictions about the plot by analyzing context. Teachers modeling this reading strategy to the scholars will include the teacher modeling the process by looking at the title and author of the book, sweeping a finger under the words as they are read out loud, look at the pictures on the cover and make predictions about what she sees and what she thinks the book will be about. Scholars will practice this skill 1  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information as demonstrated by the teacher. Scholars will also have an opportunity to discuss the strategy they focused on with a partner or whole class. Other scaffolding strategies the teachers will use are : providing visual cues to help scholars understand topics, chunking long readings into short passages, so that they see only the section they need to tackle, reading a passage aloud before scholars read independently, model fluent reading, having scholars act-ou the actions of the story, graphic organizers, and partnering scholars in purposeful groups/pairs. All of our scholars have been tested using the Fountas and Pinell running records and they all know their independent reading levels. Scholars will also receive instruction to prepare them for the NYSESLAT. The NYSESLAT instruction will be differentiated according to individual scores. Certified ESL/Bilingual teachers will create differentiated lessons that include the four modalities of English and take into consideration the various learning styles of all scholars. The school will use some of the allocated funds to pay for teachers, purchase journal notebooks, paper, pencils, fiction and non-fiction leveled books. Our fully certified ENL teacher will work on ELA skills and standards with ENL methodology and techniques; our fully certified Bilingual Common Branch teacher will focus on content instruction including math, science and social studies, preparing our scholars for state assessments and enhancing academic vocabulary and skills. Both teachers will see each group of scholars for one hour during each session. Scholars will receive native language support in the content areas with teacher support, use of word to word glossaries and technological resources of laptops and translation programs. Materials are supplemental and will be utilized as follows: Santilana: Intensive English Attanasio and Associates: Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT Teacher- created differentiated instruction lessons/activities Scaffolded reading materials Picture prompts ESL Libraries Bilingual Glossaries/Dictionaries Technology (smart board/lap top computers) RTI Materials GRADE ENTERING EMERGING TRANSITIONING EXPANDING COMMANDING TOTAL 2  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 2 1 1 1 1 0 4 3 1 0 3 3 0 7 4 1 1 2 3 1 8 5 2 2 1 1 1 7 TOTAL 5 6 3 10 1 26 Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered 3  Part C: Professional Development Begin description here: In as much as every teacher is a teacher of ELLs, we ensure quality instruction by our staff through various resources. All our teachers of ELLS, including our Title III teachers provide quality instruction to students in the Title III program. Our ENL teacher and any teacher working with our ELLs attend various ENL workshops and PDs. PDs are provided by the Principal, Assistant Principals, Lead ENL Teacher, and our DOE ENL specialist. Other PDs are provided through monthly ENL workshops turn keyed by our ENL teacher, by the Division of English Language Learners & Student Support Office, and by Brooklyn North Field Support Center. Our ENL Teacher attend most of these workshops. Pedagogues and administration are encouraged to attend professional learning sessions to enhance and deepen their knowledge of strategies to utilize and improve the achievement of English Language Learners. Attendees later turnkey the pertinent information to the teachers who have ELLs in their classes during our weekly professional learning time, common planning periods, and collaborative inquiry team meetings to discuss effective strategies for instructing English Language Learners. To date, our pedagogues have attended the following workshops: Professional Development for all staff: Mondays from 2:30-3:40 Differentiation for our English Language Learners and Students with Disability Engaging all students in our classroom How does our curriculum support our English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities These PDs have all been facilitated by one of the administrators or our literacy Coach. Additionally, The following workshops have been attended by Ms Steele our ENL teacher: Nuts & Bolts: Critical ELL Components for Compliance ELL Coordinator Working Group ELL Data Analysis Tool Training Our ENL teacher will also be attending other workshops provided in house and by various DOE organizations as they become available. Differentiated instruction and tasks for ELLs should be evident, especially in science, math, and social studies. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parents of the scholars participating in the Title III program will receive letters in their native language informing them about the benefits of the Title III program and the ongoing opportunities that their children will have by attending the program. The Title III orientation meeting will be held with parents before the commencement of the program in November. They will be kept informed about the progress their children are making while in the program. The parents will be invited to visit the classrooms while the Title III program is in 4  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities session. There will be a final meeting held with the parents and the Title III teacher at the end of the program to share their thoughts about the Title III program and the experiences they have had with their children who have been enrolled in the Title III program. The parent coordinator along with our ENL teacher will conduct a series of workshops on ELA and Math strategies for ENL. Light refreshments will be served to offer a warm and welcoming atmosphere, helping our ELL parents feel at ease and know our school is open to them. Workshops will be scheduled as follows: Session #1 How to Help your Child with Homework and Study Skills - November, 2018 Session#2 Common Core Learning Standards - January, 2019 Session #3 NYS ELA and Math, NYSESLAT Assessments - March, 2019 Session #4 Understanding Common Core Learning Standards - April, 2019 All invitations are sent in the parents' preferred language of written communication and an interpreter is made available when necessary for parents' preferred language of oral communication. Records of meetings to include agendas, attendance sheets, and invitations will be maintained in school file and ENL Teacher professional development binder. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) N/A  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A N/A N/A N/A Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 5  6  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 19 School Name Hale A. Woodruff Borough Brooklyn School Number 224 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Rochelle Hinds Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher D. Steele Teacher/Subject Area I. Feliciano/Math/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Ms. C. McGuire/AIS Superintendent Thomas McBryde Jr Assistant Principal Yvette Padilla Coach N/A School Counselor Ms. Hawkins Parent Parent Coordinator Ms. Z. Clarke Field Support Center Staff Member Lisa Weis Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 417 7 Total number of ELLs 30 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 7.19%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? All students in grades K-5 including ELLs participate in the Journeys Reading Program and are assessed at the beginning and end of the school year with the Journeys' Beginning of the year assessment (BOY) and the New York City End of Year ELA Assessment (EOY). Additionally, Fountas and Pinell running records/assessments are done to determine the reading levels of each child K-5. Teacher created assessments are utilized in each class and by the ENL teacher to further ascertain students' literacy skills and language proficiency. Finally, the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT are also used to provide useful insights on all ELLs' language proficiency and performance in the four modalities, Listening, Speaking, Reading, and Writing. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Teachers meet weekly in grade bands to collaboratively plan lessons, discuss instructional strategies and assessments. Data ascertained from various assessments (Formative and Summative) are analyzed and used to gauge and tailor classroom 8  instruction for ELLs. The ENL teacher shares and discuss data from various ELL related exams with classroom teachers through Google Drive. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? In order to evaluate the success of our ESL program, a number of informal and formal assessments are utilized. These include the NYSESLAT, NYSITELL, NYC Beginning and End of Year Assessments, and Fountas and Pinnell running records. The NYSESLAT assessment in particular is a key piece of assessment data used to identify progess and areas of need for our ELLs. Some Identified areas of needs from the NYSESLAT modality report shows generally low Reading and Writing scores and are thus identified as key areas where students need additional help and instruction. Fountas and Pinnell Running Records indicate reading levels for our ELLs and this data reveals that all of our ELL are reading below grade level. Working with ELLs to raise their reading levels is thus an area of need. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Our ELLs participate in small group Stand Alone classes which enables the ENL teacher to target specific skills and areas of weakness based on formative and summative data. Our Integrated ENL classes also allows for small group targeted instruction. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] P.S. 224’s Response to Intervention framework considers ELLs' instruction through all three tiers of intervention. Data such as students' native language, culture, and educational history are considered when making decisions regarding intervention.Considerations of Tier II intervention/instruction for English Language Learners:1. Provide intensive reading interventions to ELLs demonstrating low reading skills immediately when needed.2. Review and analyze data collected in Tier I documentation and conduct further assessments as needed, and make recommendations for Tier II. Documentation may include: • Explanation of how instruction was differentiated to address native and second language issues and cultural differences• Amount and type of ENL instruction• Select the instructional areas that need further, more intense intervention• Determine the extent of ENL instruction and needed during Tier II to ensure the student will benefit from the intervention. Considerations of Tier III intervention/instruction for English Language Learners:1. Provide intensive reading interventions to ELLs demonstrating low reading skills immediately when needed.2. Review and analyze data collected in Tier II documentation and conduct further assessments as needed, and make recommendations for Tier III. Documentation may include: • Explanation of how instruction was differentiated to address native and second language issues and cultural differences• Amount and type of ENL instruction• Select the instructional areas that need further, more intense intervention• Determine the extent of ENL instruction needed during Tier III to ensure the student will benefit from the intervention. 3. Tier III intervention needs to be provided by a well-trained specialist such as a bilingual education or ENL teacher with a strong background in literacy, or a learning disability teacher who has a strong background with and understanding the educational needs of ELLs.4. Tier III instruction may need to last for a significant period of time when students are making minimal progress; adjustments to instruction may need to be made, with consideration given to integration of contextual factors (e.g., family, personal, and classroom variables) that may need to be address as necessary. A team approach to problem solving may be very useful in interpreting factors that influence progress and provide suggestions for designing instruction.5. Students who have been provided research-based reading interventions that are typically associated with improved outcomes may not demonstrate significant gains and may require highly individualized reading instruction that considers other factors such as attention, language and vocabulary development, and behavior problems. A team approach to problem solving that considers many of these factors may facilitate the development of an appropriate instructional plan. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The NYSITELL and NYSESLAT results for the 2016-2017 school year indicate that the majority of our ELLs (33%) are at the Expanding level of English proficiency, 26% at the Emerging level while the other 41% are performing at the Emerging and 9  Transitioning level of English proficiency. This data is important in informing the planning for ELLs on a daily basis. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? All our teachers are provided with this data and attend workshops aimed at explaining this data and how to use it. Professional Learning/Professional Development is facilitated by administrators every Monday and data from various assessments(ELA, Math) is provided on a regular basis to staff. These data are analyzed and used to plan and inform lessons for students. The ENL teacher also provide all teachers with NYSESLAT data for all our ELLs each fall at the beginning of the school year with explanations of the levels and literature explaining each level and the expectations of students performing at the various levels of proficiency. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. At PS 224 our Freestanding ENL program is done using a stand alone and an Integrated format. Students are serviced using the 'Pull Out' and 'Push In' models. In the 'Push In'/Integrated format, the ENL teacher Pushes into their classroom during ELA, Math, Science or Social Studies periods. In the 'Pull Out'/ Stand Alone format the ENL teacher provide small group instruction to students. The groups are generally heterogeneous and spans across grades (two grade bands- K/1, 2/3, 4/5). Entering and Emerging ELLs receive a total of 360 minutes of ENL instruction each week. One unit of study in stand alone ENL and one unit of study in Integrated ENL (ENL/ELA). Transitioning and Expanding ELLs receive a total of 180 minutes of ENL instruction each week. Ninety minutes of Integrated ENL and ninety minutes of Stand alone ENL. Finally, Commanding students get ninety minutes of Integrated ENL per week. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Explicit ENL instruction is delivered by the ENL teacher Ms. Steele during Stand Alone ENL periods. Based on each student's proficiency level, the number of minutes of instruction is determined and delivered in 60 minutes blocks totaling 180/360 minutes each week. ELA instruction is delivered to each ELL in their ELA classes during ELA periods and Integrated ENL periods based on students' proficiency levels and as mandated by CR Part 154-2. Our students are not programmed for HLA, however, students Home Language is used as much as possible to facilitate understanding and participation in class. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The instructional strategies and techniques being employed in the Stand Alone and Integrated ENL classes are instructional approaches that help make content comprehensible. These strategies are also used by the classroom teachers as well as the ENL teacher and include differentiated instruction, home language support, technological integration, repitition and picture 0  ques and visuals, various comprehensive and reading strategies, grouping and partnering, and scaffolding. Instruction in the content areas is based on activating prior knowledge and recognizing the strong correlations between literacy in the first and second languages. English Language Learners participate in read-alouds, interdependent dialogues, partner and echo reading, shared reading, independent reading, speaking activities, and writing activities on a daily basis. In addition, ELL students receive content based instructions that will enable them to meet the standards in Math, Science, and Social Studies. To make these strategies and techniques effective, P.S. 224 has purchased high-interest leveled books and materials to support the ESL program. Some of the materials used in the ESL Lab includes Santillana Intensive English program, Harcourt's Moving Into English program, Go Math, and Bridges and Navigators Reading Libraries. At P.S. 224, we recognize the fact that there is a strong correlation between first and second language literacy skills. Students who have developed pre-literacy/literacy skills in their first language make the transition to English more easily. In addition, the Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol (SIOP), which includes the use of Anticipation Guides, Double-Entry Journals, and Graphic Organizers, is the model for ELL practices. In collaboration with the assistant principal for ELLs, classroom teachers, coaches, and the ESL teacher developed curriculums aligned with the City and State standards. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELLs are evaluated in their native languages through the initial Spanish Lab assessment and through the various NYS native language exams that are given in students' native languages where applicable. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Differentiation is provided for all ELL subgroups. Activities that require Total Physical Response (TPR) are used with all subgroups of ELLs. Newcomers are assigned tasks to enhance listening and speaking skills in English and are instructed in sheltered English. Once newcomers have adequately progressed in listening and speaking skills, newcomers are asked to complete tasks that focus on building reading and writing skills in English. ELLs that are receiving 4 to 6 years of service are instructed on how to strengthen reading and writing skills in English while continuing to enhance listening and speaking skills. Long term ELLs (ELLs that have received 6 or more years of service) receive targeted instruction in reading and writing skills. ELLs that have special needs receive targeted instruction in reading, writing, listening, and speaking modalities based on the students' needs and abilities. 5a. At present, there are no Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE) at P.S. 224. However, in order to provide for potential SIFE students, the ELL teacher will implement targeted instruction during the 360 minutes. Ongoing communication with parents and participation in Early Morning Tutoring and Extended day programs are available for potential SIFE students. In addition, any SIFE students will be provided with one-on-one remedial instruction according to their NYSESLAT performance levels in high needs areas of reading, writing, speaking and listening as necessary. The ELL after-school program will incorporate programs such as Santillana and Bridges in the content areas for additional support. 5b. Newcomers (ELLs receiving less than three years of ESL services) will receive targeted instruction in ELA and Math. Instruction is differentiated for newcomers by content, process, and products. the use of ongoing assessments, flexible grouping, and partnering helps make differentiation a success for our newcomers. 5c. ELLs receiving 4-6 years of service receive differentiated instruction on a daily basis. mixed ability grouping, use of technology, visuals, and different levels of reading and activities help to give them access to learning. Ongoing informal and formal assessments account for students' progress. Communication with parents and classroom teachers continue as students progress. 5d. Currently, there are no long term ELL students attending P.S. 224. However, in order to provide for potential long term ESL students. There would be consistent communication with the classroom teachers and the ESL teacher to discuss the progress of the ELL students. In necessary, some ESL students may require other intervention services to facilitate their academic advancement. The Pupil Personnel Team (PPT) at P.S. 224 helps to determine how to best help them meet the standards reviews individual student progress. 5e. Former ELLs receive differentiated instruction to meet their learning needs, interests, and goals. Lessons and activities are differentiated through content, process, and product. 1  6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELL-SWDs use many and varied instructional strategies and grade level materials to accelerate English language development of ELL-SWDs and to provide access to academic content. These strategies include explicit instructions in vocabulary and English structures, the use of ELLs background knowledge and Home language to increase participation and comprehension, utilizing peer/group interaction and buddying, differentiated and customized lessons, and scaffolding. In addition, grade level materials such as bilingual glossaries, pictures and visuals, graphic organizers, flashcards, text books, leveled classroom libraries, SMARTBoard Technologies, and access to computers and the Internet are used daily to promote English language acquisition and access to content areas. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELL-SWDs receive their mandated ESL minutes of instruction as determined by their NYSESLAT level and mandated by CR Part 154-2. The IEP is also an integral tool used for planning for Ell-SWDs and teachers provide the necessary adjustments/supports in instruction as per this document. Ongoing informal and formal assessments account for students' progress. There is consistent communication with parents and classroom teachers. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. At P.S. 224 ELLs are provided with targeted intervention and assistance in ELA, Math, and all other core content areas. Our school uses the RTI program as our core foundation for instruction for all students across all grade levels including our ELLs. programs such as Journeys, Go Math, Expeditionary Learning, and our Social Studies and Science curriculum includes differentiated instructions and suggestions to provide for and accommodate ELLs learning. Additionally, supplemental reading, writing, math, and Social Studies materials are used in grade 3-5 classes to reinforce ELL learning. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? In the upcoming school year, ELLs will participate in new programs being considered. These include, Art and drama, Peer Mediation, Waterford Learning, Respect For All, STAR Reading, STAR Math, Little Kids Rock, and Box Out Bullying. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. P.S. 224 does not exempt or bar any of our students from available school programs. All our ELLs have access to all school program available. ELLs participate in our supplemental Saturday Academy and our Title III tutoring programs which provide additional assistance in English and the content areas. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials such as Go Math, Santillana Intensive English, Harcourt’s Moving Into English, Waterford, STAR Reading, STAR Math and content area native language glossaries are used to help increase ELLs language acquisition and academic progress. All materials listed are designed to correspond to ELLs' ages and grade levels. ELLs are also supported by the use of the SMARTBoard within the ENL Lab, and access to the Internet and laptops. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? PS 224 does not currently offer a bilingual or Dual Language program. ALL our students are instructed in English in our ENL program. However, students have access to materials in their native language to encourage transference of skills. Students are provided with native language glossaries, content-area textbooks in students’ native languages, and literature in students’ 2  native languages. All teachers of ELLs are encouraged to provide instruction using sheltered English and language learning strategies. Bilingual paraprofessionals also help to provide native language support for our ELLs. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Curriculum and resources are age and grade appropriate so that they are aligned to student interests and needs. Students in grades K-5 including ELLs and ELLs-SWD use the Journeys' text in ELA classrooms. These texts are age and grade appropriate. Additionally, teachers on all grade levels utilize and supplement the required texts with teacher made materials on a daily basis. These materials allow for students in grades K-5 to be engaged in tasks that aid in building phonemic awareness, phonics, vocabulary, comprehension and fluency. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Currently our school shares the building with a Dist 75 school that houses Kindergarten students. Each school is independent of the other and only share resources/common spaces such as the gym and cafeteria. The shared spaces are programmed within the schedule. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Through efforts of our parent coordinator and ELL teacher, newly enrolled ESL students in grades 3-5will be identified, parents notified and students offered academic enrichment through the summer school program which targets deficits in reading, writing, listening and speaking. ELLs that enroll throughout the school year has access to all our academic and extracurricular programs available. Parents and students are offered orientation sessions. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional development for all teachers is ongoing throughout the school year. Teachers of ELLs are encouraged and given several opportunities to attend various professional development workshops and sessions both in house and across the city. This school year, 2017-2018, there are a number of professional development opportunities for the ELL teacher and all other teachers that have ELLs in their classrooms. On-site professional developments planned for this school year include workshops on various ELL teaching strategies that can be utilized in the classroom on a daily basis, Integrating technology in the classroom to support ELL learning, implementing the RTI model across all classrooms and grades, ELL assessment and data analysis, and differentiating instruction for all students (including ELLs). Additionally, several workshops are being offered throughout the school year by Department of English Language Learners and Student Support (DELLSS) as well as the Brooklyn North Field Support Center to teachers of ELLs which staff of PS 224 will participate in. 3  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. All staff members will have received the mandated amount of hours of training and professional development in methodology for instructing students with limited English proficiency through on-going professional development activities such as focus workshops and study groups. This school year, all pedagogues that teach ELLs as well as the ENL teacher will receive the required 15% and 50% ELL specific professional development respectively. This will be done through weekly professional development sessions on Mondays of each week, as well as off site professional development workshops offered by Brooklyn North and DELLSS. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Every Tuesday from 2:20-2:55pm, throughout the school year, parents are given the opportunity to come in and have on one meetings and discussion with teachers about their child(ren) progress. PS 224 utilizes this time for parent engagement where parents of ELLs can come in to discuss the goals of the program, their children's language development progress, assessments results and needs on an individual basis. Interpretation and translation services will be contacted if needed. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parent and community involvement is ongoing at P.S. 224. The parent coordinator, Mrs. Cameron, along with the Parent Teacher Association focuses on creating a warm welcoming environment for all parents including parents of ELLs. The parent coordinator develops stable relationships with members of the school community including all faculty and staff memebers, parents, and children. The parent coordinator and the PTA conduct monthly parent workshops and information sessions throughout the school year. In order to meet parents' needs, workshops and information sessions are based on parent surveys that are mailed out at the beginning of the school year. These workshops and information sessions assist parents in knowing how to support their child's learning at home and outside of the school. These sessions help to provide strategies that parents can use to support, monitor and advocate for their children's education and healthy development. Parents are invited to numerous "Family Nights," and family oriented events. Mandated orientation sessions for ELL parents are held throughout the year with the help of the parent coordinator. These sessions are provided, as needed, to meet the needs of the newly arrived ELLs. Workshops in the native languages of the parents for parent teacher conferences, and seminars on immigrant services available in the community are also provided. All parents at P.S. 224 are encouraged to participate in the Learning Leaders Program so that they can be volunteers at the school. PS 224 host an annual Multicultural day event that is celebrated across the whole school and community. All parents, including parents of ELLs are invited and are given the opportunities to participate in various ways such as providing dishes that represent their culture. PS 224 also host an annual talent show for students and all students are encouraged to participate and show off their various talents. Parents are invited to this event and get a chance to see their children on stage performing. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 4  5 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Rochelle Hinds, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 6  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS224 School DBN: 19K224 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Rochelle Hinds Title Principal Christine Cabrera-Charles Assistant Principal Ms. Z. Clarke Parent Coordinator Denise Steele ENL/Bilingual Teacher I. Feliciano N/A N/A Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Ms. Hawkins School Counselor Thomas McBryde Jr Bernadette Fitzgerald Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/01/17 10/01/17 10/01/17 10/01/17 10/01/17 10/01/17 10/01/17 10/01/17 10/01/17 10/01/17 10/01/17 10/01/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 7  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 19K224 School Name: Hale A. Woodruff Superintendent: Joyce Stallings The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. One key piece of data used at PS 224 to assess language preferences of all parents including Limited-English Proficient Parents is the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS). This information is specifically garnered from PART 3-Parent Information where parents/guardians are asked to indicate the language they would prefer to receive written communication and the language they would prefer to communicate orally with school staff. Additionally, blue contact cards filled out by each parent registering a child at PS 224 are also used to determine the parent/guardian preferred language of written and oral communication. Finally, our parent coordinator in collaboration with the ENL teacher composed and send out parent surveys to each household in an effort to ascertain the needs of our parents including language and communication needs. 8  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language The parents' preferred language for written and oral communication at PS 224 include English, Spanish, Haitian Creole, and French. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Documents sent out from PS 224 that usually require translation include our monthly calendars, All parent letters, Parent Teacher Conferences notification and reminders, Curriculum Night notifications, PTA meetings, After school activities. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Curriculum Night - September interpretation service(s)? 9  Parent-Teacher conferences - November, March Promotion in Doubt Meetings - January, February Guidance Counselor meetings with parents- Ongoing Parent Engagement Tuesdays- Every Tuesday throughout the school year. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) At Ps 224 a welcome poster is placed at a prominent location where it will be visible to all visitors that come inside the school building. Parents will be provided the Parents' Bill of Rights and the Parents' Guide to Language Access. For any parent that indicates the need of translation services on the Language ID Guide the Translation and Interpretation Unit will be contacted starting with the security officer at the security desk, personnel in the main office, the Parent Coordinator, the Language Access Coordinator Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? PS 224 will frequently review the responses provided by parents on the HLIS and parent surveys to determine if any adjusments or changes need to be made to our procedures to provide Translation and Interpretation Services. 0  1 
