 School Name: 22K245 P.S. 245 Principal: ERICA WILLIAMS   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information PS 245 332200010245 PK - 5 School Number (DBN): 22K245 249 East 17 th Street Brooklyn, NY 11226 718-284-2330 718-284-2333 Phone Number: Fax: Erica Nicole Williams Ewillia142schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Email Address: Erica Nicole Williams Lauren Donner Wanda Gray Parents’ Association President: Jennifer Giacopello & Lauren Donner SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Wanda Gray n/a n/a Geographical District: 22 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Julia Bove Superintendent: 5619 Flatlands Ave. Brooklyn, NY 11226 jbove@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-968-6114 Phone Number: 718-968-6117 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Brooklyn South Dr. Mauriciere De Govia FSC: Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 415 East 89 th Street Room 407 Brooklyn, NY 11209 Mdegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-759-4862 Phone Number: 718-759-4960 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Erica Nicole Williams Lauren Donner Wanda Gray Jennifer Giacopello Wanda Gray Anna Resker Jasia Basnight Aide Hernandez *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/UFT Paraprofessional Member/UFT Teacher Member/Parent   Regina Bauer Nyesha Stoute Nilsa Grandel Diana Rios Nency Espinal Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/UFT Secretary Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? PS 245 is committed to providing our children with a rigorous education with an emphasis on the arts and science. Through engaging learning experiences, our goal is to empower each student to grow intellectually and socially.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 245 Magnet School of Arts and Science is a small school of approximately 320 students located in the Flatbush section of Brooklyn. Our school is a host for students in grades PK -5. 93% of our students are of Black and Hispanic origin. 88% of students qualify for free lunch and 11% and 23% of students receive English as a Second Language and Special Education services respectively (based on 2016-2017 School Quality Snapshot) Instructional Focus: Our focus is to develop teacher pedagogy that is informed by the instructional shifts, the Danielson Framework for Effective Teaching, aligned to the CCLS and engages students while meeting their individual needs. Our school prides itself on setting high standards for all of our students. As a result, students participate daily in hands-on activities and discussions to deepen their knowledge in all content areas. To ensure this, this will be our fourth consecutive year in which we have partnered with Columbia’s Teacher’s College Reading and Writing Project for literacy and writing. In reading workshop, students are exposed to various genres of literature and informational text. Our students read independently for sustained periods of time varying from 15-30 minutes depending on the grade level. Students are taught to think deeply and critically about the impact of the characters, events and author’s craft and structure on the plot. Students are asked to envision, interpret and synthesize information in order to form valid ideas and arguments about and around a text. In doing so, the expectation is that students will be able to defend their thesis statements by citing text evidence that supports these arguments. Additionally, to support our instructional focus, all students participate in LEAD (Let Everyone Ask and Discuss) where teachers pose questions that aligned to Depth of Knowledge. During this time on Tuesday and Thursdays, students participate in student-led discussions and Socratic Seminars using the mentor text for the current unit of study. We will continue to use the Department of Education's recommended GoMath program. This program requires students to problem solve using multiple steps. Students engage with real-life problems using various strategies and manipulatives to assist with inquiry and exploration of a given concept. Additionally, our teachers have aligned the GoMath units to the scope and sequence from EngageNY. Teachers use the resources from EngageNY to supplement our GoMath program. . Teacher teams meet on an ongoing basis to plan and create curricula maps and lesson plans in all content areas. More specifically, teacher team collaborate to plan project-based learning units that are aligned to our magnet theme of Arts and Science. Specialist teachers such as the art and science teachers also work collaboratively with classroom teachers to ensure that there is an interdisciplinary approach to learning and that lessons conducted in these specialty areas align and support a current unit of study. Our school's magnet theme of arts and science is inter-woven . Teacher teams will continue to work with our Magnet Specialist and Coordinator to integrate our magnet themes across the content areas. Teacher teams also work together to analyze student data; they are paying close attention and looking for trends across the class and the grade. At this time, decisions are made on next steps for individual, small group and if necessary, whole class instruction. Here at P.S. 245 Magnet School of Arts and Science, we have infused technology in all of our classrooms. Each classroom is equipped with a SMARTBoard, a document camera and four desktop computers. There is a mobile laptop cart on each floor of the school containing 36 laptops each and ipads. 0  Our school has also worked to teach and promote our students’ social development. Students participate in restorative practices through class lessons. Students are celebrated monthly for exhibiting good character, citizenship and effort. We strongly believe that “It takes a village to raise a child.” In order for our students to be successful, we must have ongoing support and communication with families and our immediate community. Parents are invited to visit their child’s classroom monthly to participate in our Family As Learners. During this time, we ask parents to engage and work with students as part of the learning process. Our school also distributes progress reports with grade level expectations three times a year so parents are aware of their child’s current performance. With the distribution of progress reports and report cards, parents are updated every 6 weeks of their child’s progress. Families are also invited to participate in school wide events such as our Unity Walk, STEAM Night, Field Day, Spring Fling Performance and Block Party, to name a few. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our student body is comprised of special needs students( IEP driven students and ELLs). These students receive mandated services through their IEPs and/or ELLs mandates which may require additional academic or social-emotional supports. Our students who are considered "at-risk" (performing below grade level expectations) receive small group instruction and additional instructional time. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our school has made the most progress in the area of Rigorous Instruction over the past year. Our school has exceeded the 5% increase in students performing at/above grade level expectations as measured by the end of the unit Go Math assessments. Our school will continue to focus on math instruction. Our goal will be to continue to develop teachers' knowledge of content and pedagogy in this area. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 22K245 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 308 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 5 5 18 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 35 28 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 95.0% % Attendance Rate 90.6% % Reduced Lunch 6.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.3% 38.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.08 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 44.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 88% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A YSH YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A YSH YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 28 29 94.3% 4.9% 23.4% 54.5% 1.6% 1.6% 0 0% 5.9 35.1% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. PS 245 has met the target for student achievement in ELA and Math for the 2016-17 school year. (2016-2017 School Quality Snapshot). However, the results on the 2017 NYS Math exam, indicates that only 40% of the students in grades 3-5 are performing at/or above grade level. Also, an analysis of in-school math data showed that as of June 2018, 61% of students across all grades scored at/above grade level expectations; however students in grades 3-5 only performed at 53% at/above grade level expectation as measured by GoMath unit exams. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 5% increase in the number of students in grades 3-5 performing at above grade level expectations in math as measured by the Go Math End-of-Year assessment. Currently, student proficiency is 53%. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Grade level teacher teams will meet on a continuously basis (before the beginning of a new unit) to review and learn the content and strategies for each unit. Teacher teams will determine the best strategies to introduce to students throughout the unit; allowing students the strategy of choice to problem solve. Through the refinement of the workshop model, content knowledge and effective pedagogical practices, students will be provided daily with real-life problems and activities during math instruction. Teachers teams will also work collaboratively to align GoMath units to follow the scope and sequence from EngageNY, thus ensuring full alignment and the teaching of specific concepts and standards by the end of each grade level. Teachers will provide math instruction beginning each lesson with a real life problem solving activity aka the problem of the day. Teachers will provide math instruction daily for a minimum of a 45 minute period, with math instruction occurring in the morning a minimum of two times weekly. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers and Students Sept. 2018- Principal and grade level teacher teams June 2019 Teachers Sept. 2018- June 2019 Principal and grade-level teacher teams, all teachers Teachers and students Sept. 2018- Principal, teacher teams June 2019 Teachers Sept. 2018- June 2019 Sept. 2018-June 2019 Principal and grade-level teacher teams, all teachers Principal and grade -level teacher teams, all teachers, ELL teacher Sept. 2018- June Staff developer, Principal 2019 Teachers will work with small groups of students with an emphasis on SWDs and ELLs to provide scaffolds and strategies to help support and meet the needs of these learners; thus ensuring that there is access to the curriculum. Students Teachers will participate in professional learning activities provided by Metamorphosis. This professional learning will enhance and strengthen teachers’ content area knowledge and is aligned to the CCLS. Teachers across grades K-5 will receive 8 days of on-site professional development Teachers & Students Students in grades 2-5 will participate in a diagnostic exam provided by I-Ready and complete on-line lessons based on the data, a minimum of 45 minutes a week. Students Sept. 2018- June Classroom teachers and Principal 4 Teachers will analyze the data from I-Ready and use it to inform small group instruction. Teachers will participate in professional development sessions provided by I-Ready to assist in the implementation of this plan. 2019 Teachers Sept. 2018- June Classroom teachers and Principal 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. By June 2019, the principal and teachers will host a minimum of 3 events where parents are invited to the school for classroom visits and workshops. These visits will increase parents' knowledge of the CCLS and more specifically, the instruction that is delivered to their child, the strategies taught and grade level expectations. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Diem days to for sub coverage to allow for teacher collaboration, planning and preparation before the beginning of each unit. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Students in grades 3-5 will be assessed at the beginning and the end of each unit. By February 2019, students is these respective grades will have a 3% increase of students performing at or above grade level expectations as measured by the GoMath topic tests. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) GoMath topic tests, Teacher rating in math in components 1A & 1E of the Danielson Framework for Effective Teaching Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Our school is a small learning community. This is our strength in that the teachers are able to know and offer support to all of our students individually. Our teachers support each other by supporting the students in each others class. Although, the data for the 2017-2018 school year does not show a significant increase in OORS data and incidents at the school, we have seen an increase in the number of students in crisis and students requiring mandated counseling services. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In order to support the entire child as well as to reduce the number of student-to-student conflicts and Principal's suspensions, by June 2019, 100% of teachers will implement the social-emotional program Sanford Harmony, a minimum of 3 times weekly. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Classroom Teachers will use the concepts and materials supplied through the Sanford Harmony program to implement lessons which emphasize appropriate social interactions and relationships among peers. The Parent Coordinator will work collaboratively with community based organizations to schedule assembly programs for students in grades 2-5 to help address the socially and emotionally needs of students. The topics of these assemblies will vary from bullying, safety, conflict resolution, etc. The Parent Coordinator will work in conjunction with agencies to support student social and emotional growth by providing resources to students which will help students with peer meditation and conflict resolution. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students Sept. 2018- Teachers June 2019 Students Sept. 2018- Parent Coordinator and June 2019 Teachers Students Sept. Parent Coordinator 2018- and Teachers June 2019 Sept. 2018- June 2019 Guidance Counselor The Guidance Counselor will attend workshops to address the social and emotional needs of students. As a result, she will provide professional development to teachers and host workshops for students. Students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. By June 2019, the parent coordinator will host a minimum of 2 workshops to engage and inform parents of the support organizations within the community. These workshops will also provide parents with strategies, tips and information with an emphasis social-emotional skills, bullying, cyber-bullying, etc. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Sanford Harmony Curriculum 7  Partnerships with Community Based Organizations Guidance Counselor Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will monitor to ensure that teachers' program cards indicate an allotted time during the school day for the implementation of Sanford Harmony program. Student work products as evidenced of the implementation of the program will also we collected. By February 2019, we will monitor to ensure that the Parent Coordinator has held a minimum of 1 parent workshop. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS data, student work products and sign in sheets of presenters. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The teachers at PS. 245 are very receptive to working together as a team. Through classroom visits and observations, it is evident that there needs to be improved collaboration between classroom teachers and the ENL teacher; in order for the ENL teacher to reinforce and supplement the content, vocabulary and strategies being taught in the classroom through the use of practices specific to meet the needs of our ENL learners. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teacher teams will work collaboratively with the ENL teacher monthly, to plan and develop lesson plans for the current unit of study in literacy and math; thus deepening the content knowledge of the ENL teacher to better the support our ENL students. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The ENL teacher will work monthly during professional development time with grade level teacher teams to align lessons during pull-out ENL periods to the current concepts and unit of study. Teachers & Sept. 2018- K-5 Students June 2019 Grade level teacher teams, ENL teacher, Principal The ENL teacher will participate in professional development learning opportunities offered through our partnership with Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project for the lower grades, K-2, in order to keep abreast of the curriculum and best pedagogical practices. The ENL teacher will attend off-site professional development learning opportunities with classroom teachers. These workshops will be geared towards improving content knowledge and pedagogy. ENL Teacher Sept. 2018- Staff Developer, Principal & June 2019 Students K-5 Sept. Principal Students 2018-June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. By June 2019, grade level teacher teams will work together to plan and prepare a minimum of 4 workshops where parents will learn about the concepts taught in the classroom. Parents will be provided with strategies to help work and support their child's academic performance at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 80 minute professional development for teachers 0  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 50% of ENL class visits and observations will show of evidence of alignment between planning and lessons with the current unit of study. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Curriculum Maps, lesson plans, Advance Observation data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The Principal attends professional development sponsored by Teachers' College Reading and Writing Project. Additionally, the principal attends and participates in professional learning activities at the school level alongside the teachers. Based on the June 2018, TC Running Record data, there are 39% of students in grades K-2 who have not met the benchmark independent reading level. Additionally, school-wide data shows that there 13 students across grades K-2 who have not met promotional criteria. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the principal will work to increase and implement a team of staff who will be able to support students in grades 1 & 2 in ELA and mathematices, who have been identified as "at-risk" (not meeting grade level expectations), by increasing the number of students from 3% to 10%. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Staff members will receive professional development in specific intervention programs in order to address and meet the needs of targeted students. Identified “at-risk” students Staff members will provide additional academic support to students at a minimum of 2 times weekly for a minimum of 30 minutes each session in six week cycles. Identified “at-risk” students Sept. 2018-June 2019 Designated Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Principal Sept. 2018- June 2019 Designated Teachers, Paraprofessionals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Workshops and invitations to visit classrooms Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional Development in various intervention programs Pending funding - purchasing of the interventions programs and materials Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 3  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will review staff program cards to ensure that 100% of the team's cards reflect the correct number of students to be serviced. By February 2019, we will monitor the "identified at-risk" student progress in meeting grade level expectations by analyzing student data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The data that will be analyzed will be end of unit GoMath topic exams, running record assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In recognition of the critical role of parents as partners, our priority need is to increase our parent communication. In doing so, we hope to increase the level of parent involvement by increasing the number of parents who stay actively involved in their children’s educational experience. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 20% increase in parent communication between the school, classroom teachers and parents. This will be measured through notices, letters, parent communication logs and ILOG. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). A wide variety of instructional and non-instructional workshops as well as regular opportunities for parents to meet with their children’s teachers such as Family as Learners. Flyers & School Messenger phone system will be sent home to communicate these events to parents. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? PK-5 Parents Sept. Principal, Teachers, Parent Coordinator 2018- June 2019 Regular communication with parents through School Messenger, Class Dojo & Remind as well as weekly 40 minutes for parent engagement, monthly newsletter. PK-5 Sept. Parents 2018- Principal, Teachers, Parent Coordinator Parent Coordinator will provide family workshops and training PK-5 Sept. Principal, Teachers, Parent Coordinator June 2019 Parents 2018- June 2019 Collaboration between parents and staff in SLT and PA Executive Board members to promote and encourage parent communication and involvement PK-5 Sept. Parents 2018- Principal, Teachers, Parent Coordinator June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Brooklyn Music School, Marquis Studios Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent Coordinator Workshops, Tuesday afternoon parent engagement, , school messenger, SLT, PA, monthly newsletter Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 6  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will review and analyze communication records to ensure that we are on track to meeting this goal. At this midpoint, we expect that there will be a 10% increase. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Flyers, Communication Logs Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Based on teacher recommendation, independent reading level and overall average on unit exams. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) ELA Tutorial Program- Students in grades 1-5 receive instruction in reading, listening, and the writing process. Literacy Push-In and Pull-Out of classroom personnel push-in during the literacy block. Fundations (K-2) & Close Reading Programs that are used to provide instruction in decoding, encoding, and comprehension. MyOn Comprehension- A comprehension program, which is accessed via the internet, and is utilized to improve student comprehension in grades K-5. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group direct instruction for at-risk and/or enrichment students in grades 1-5. Small group instruction Small group instruction Small group instruction Computer Independent work in school and at home. Whole class instruction, small During the literacy block, from 9:15 to 10:00 a.m. every day. 8  Mathematics Based on teacher recommendation and student overall performance on unit topic exams. Teachers College Reading and Writing Project. Students are bench marked four times a year. All teachers use this intensive program every day for reading and writing. Reading Rescue - a program that addresses decoding and fluency deficits. Math Tutoring Program- Students in grades 1-5 receive instruction in problem solving and math skills groups, and one-to- one conference. One-on-one instruction Whole class instruction with opportunities for grouping in the first 50 minutes. Go Math- This classroom program provides differentiated activities to help low- performing children Both whole class instruction and small groups. During the instructional day and during ELA after-school. During the instructional day. During the instructional day, and/or during ELA after-school, as well as at home. During the literacy block. During the literacy block During the day for 45 minutes on two days. Also, times a week during math after-school. During the day during math instruction and during Math/ELA after-school. 9 Science Based on unit exam test scores Social Studies Based on unit exam scores At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Based on teacher recommendation, student anecdotal records, OORS data master grade level concepts. Science Tutoring Program- This program works to improve the analytical skills of 4th grade students in the area of Science Supplementary Materials- All students in grades K-5 have access to both text books and trade books appropriate for a range of reading levels. These high interest books help students analyze historic periods using multiple sources of information and to develop an understanding of sophisticated concepts. Additionally, these materials support the non-fiction emphasis of the new Common Core State Standards. A guidance counselor provides student support services— one-to-one counseling, group peer mediation and intervention and peer leadership training. Whole class instruction with opportunities for grouping in the first 50 minutes Whole class instruction with opportunities for grouping During the school day. This program meets for 10 weeks prior to the NYS Science assessment. It takes place 2-4 days a week, 1-2 hours each day During the instructional day Individual, small group and whole class instruction During the instructional day 0  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) There are 16 students in Temporary Housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. School supplies and school uniform. Other services and materials will be provided on a case to case basis. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 1  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● All resumes are reviewed and evaluated of candidates who express an interest in holding a teaching position at PS 245. ● The principal attends Hiring Fairs. ● Potential candidates are interviewed and required to teach a lesson. ● The Principal follows up with checking references of those individuals who are interviewed for positions. ● Keep teachers abreast of the new initiatives and expectations of the DOE such as the Four Pillars and Capacity Framework. ● Provide professional development on the 8 components of Advance Teacher evaluation system. ● Provide professional development in literacy and math, which is supported by Teacher’s College and the network Achievement Coaches. Provide specific targeted professional development to specialist area teachers in science, art, ENL and special education. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ● Professional development is provided by Teacher’s College Reading and Writing Project to teachers and Principal. ● Provide teachers with professional development on the Danielson Framework and CCLS. ● Teachers work weekly to analyze student work and data. 3  ● Teachers set annual goals and rate and reflect on their practice during post-observation conferences. Provide specific targeted professional development to specialist area teachers in science, art, ESL and special education. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). ● During the first week of school, parents are invited to escort their child to school. ● Parent Teacher’s Conference held within the first month of school- September 16 th . ● Children are gradually transitioned to full day as initially they spend a few hours with parents in the classroom. ● The teacher utilizes the Pre-Kindergarten Foundation for the Common Core. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. ● Teachers play an integral role and are the prime decision makers as to when classroom assessments will be administered. 4   Additionally, although the assessments are aligned and are part of the curricula programs that the school utilizes, teacher teams determine when school wide assessments such as Teacher’s College running records, baseline writing, etc. are administered as well as the select the items in which to evaluate student learning. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 15, 18,21,25, n/a n/a n/a 15,18,21,25, Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 243,1110 n/a n/a n/a 1,798,373.00 X n/a X n/a X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. 5  Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 6  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S 245, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. PS 245 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students 7  ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 8  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; 9  ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) [PS 245] , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; 0  ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 1  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 3  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 22 School Name PS 245 Borough Brooklyn School Number 245 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Erica N. Williams Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Teacher/Subject Area Earl Terrill/IEP Specialist Teacher/Subject Area Andrine Grant/SETSS Related-Service Provider Superintendent Julia Bove Assistant Principal N/A Coach School Counselor Parent Wanda Gray /President PA Parent Coordinator Lynette Bradshaw Field Support Center Staff Member J. Benoit,C. Etienne, A. Perez Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 313 4 Total number of ELLs 70 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 22.36%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? AT P.S. 245 the assessment tool used to assess the early literacy skills of ELLs is Teacher's College (TC) Reading Running Record Assessment. It is a benchmark assessment system that can be used to identify a student's current reading level and progress along a gradient of text levels over time. With this running record assessment system, reading level is monitored three times each year. This assessment provides and tracks every students reading level (with equivalent grade levels) with accuracy, fluency, as well as detailed information and scores on comprehension. The data obtained through TC's Reading Running Record Assessment , it provides literacy data on all students, including the ELL population, with this data we are able to further drive instruction and aide students who are not meeting grade level criteria with extra instruction such as Reading Rescue. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? small group targeted instruction with specialist teachers 5  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Success of the Freestanding ELL program is measured through Annual Yearly Progress for ELLS through data tools such as the AMAO and the NYSESLAT. The data reveals that PS 245 consistently meets all targets: 96.30% of student made progress in English Language Acquisition; 29.63% of students atained profiieny on the NYSESLAT. In additon, the majority (78%) of ELLS are either at a proficiency level of Commanding or Expanding within 1-3 of ENL instruction. Success for ELL students is also determined by the ability of the student to function successfully in his/her mainstream class. Comfortablity, Communication and Community are essential factors within the PS 245 community that help ELLs master social and academic language. Can the student master the more complex academic language and content of the mainstream class? Academic language acquisition isn't just the understanding of content area vocabulary. It includes skills such as comparing, classifying, synthesizing, evaluating, and inferring. Academic language tasks are context reduced. Information is read from a textbook or presented by the teacher. As a student gets older the context of academic tasks becomes more and more reduced. The teacher's assessments of the student's ability to read, write, and comprehend English as well as their peers on their proficiency tests determine whether or not the studentwill advance to the next grade level. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Targeted small group instruction with specialist teachers 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Universal screening is used to establish a baseline of student performance and identify students who are not making academic progress at expected rates. Screening assessments give clear indications of risk in specific domains through set benchmarks or criteria, or by detailing how a child performs relative to peers of the same age or grade level. These assessments often point out risks that may not be apparent from classroom interactions alone, and they are especially useful for understanding performance across groups of students. Strong core instruction is delivered to ELL students in the general education classroom by a qualified educators. Intensive, targeted instruction is provided to support ELLs who are not showing sufficient progress on the skills and/or competencies measured. Progress/monitoring informs how at-risk students are responding to instruction. Progress monitoring data is used to make educational decisions about changes in goals, instruction, and/or services; as well as whether to consider a referral for special education services. When progress is monitored, the expected rate of an ELL’s progress takes into account language development and background. The student’s progress is then compared with levels demonstrated by peers from comparable cultural, linguistic, and experiential backgrounds who have received the same or comparable intervention. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Quantitatively the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT data reveals : 9% of Students are at an ENTERING proficiency; 7% Emerging; 6% Transitioning; 45% Expanding; and 33% Commanding. The majority of the students at P.S. 245 have either attained proficiency are now considered FELLS or are at an Expanded Profiiciency Level. Additionally,t he data patterns across proficiency levels reveal that ELL students are highly successful in their in their Basic Interpersonal Communication Skills (BICS), while within the Reading/Writing modality additional, strong, ongoing support is required. As students begin to understand and communicate in the English language, teachers are supportive in building on ELLs content knowledge in support of their cognitive Academic Language Proficiency (CALP). 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Weekly Professional Development, teacher team meetings Part IV: ELL Programming 6  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The organization models include push-in, pull-out, and collaborative. Mainstream classes are heterogeneously grouped in grade level configurations and ESL instruction is delivered through a combination pull-out/push-in model. Freestanding ESL students are taught English with native language support, where necessary. Pullout ESL students spend the majority of their day in an English speaking classroom supplemented by English-focused instruction in a small group. The ESL teacher plans with the mainstream teacher to ensure content alignment. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? As mandated, all Entering and Emerging ELLs receive 360 minutes per week of ENL instruction by a certified ESL teacher. This is supplemented by the extended day program. The ESL instruction is delivered through small group instruction with a focus on English language objectives, emphasizing reading and writing strategies. Beginner ELLs will receive a minimum of 180 minutes standalone ENL, as well as 180 minutes of integrated ENL and ELA. Emergining ELLs will receive at minimum 90 minutes of stand alone ENL, as well as 180 minutes integrated ENL and ELA with and additional 90 minutes of either standalone or integrated ENL with ELA or any other content area. Transitioning and Expanding ELLs receive 180 minutes per week of ENL instruction. For Transitioning ELLs, 90 minutes will be integrated ENL/ELA and 90 minutes will be standalone or integrated ENL with ELA or any other content area. Expanding ELLs will receive 180 integrated ENL/ELA or other content area. Transitional ELLs receive 90 minutes of support in integrated ENL/ELA or content area instruction. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. With the Push-In Model, the ESL the ESL teacher works with ELLs during content instruction in collaboration with regular classroom teachers to provide language acquisition and vocabulary support while retaining content instruction time. The ESL teacher plans carefully with the general education teacher to ensure Common Core curricular alignment. In the Pull-Out model, ELLs who spend the majority of their day in all-English content instruction are brought together from various classes for English-acquisition-focused instruction. Content area vocabulary is taught in conjunction with English acquisition. The ESL teacher plans carefully with the general education teachers to ensure Common Core curricular alignment. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Native Spanish students who are designated for ESL services take the Spanish LAB test. Through the use of the Spanish LAB results, language dominance is determined and, as such, the degree of native language support required is determined. Students may take the standardized math and science tests in their native language, as needed. 7  5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. At the Present time, P.S. 245 has no SIFE students. However, differentiation and additional scaffolds are in place that would support SIFE students. for example 1. Provides supported reading for students who have difficulty with text material (e.g. reading buddies, taped portions of text, highlighted texts, graphic organizers for distilling text, double entry journals, etc). 2. Introduces key vocabulary through simple definitions and icons or illustrations. 3. Provides English language learners with linguistic buddies, dual-language dictionaries, primary language internet sites, and opportunities for primary language usage for learning. 4. Provides resources at a range of reading levels and at varying degrees of content complexity. 5. Uses small-group instruction to conduct concept attainment lessons. 6. Connects enduring understandings (e.g. big ideas) with a variety of student experiences, cultures, interests, and perspectives during discussions. 7. Uses a variety of techniques to provide participation opportunities for all students to verbally interact (e.g. Think Pair Share, cueing). 8. Provides varied homework assignments as needed. 9. Provides opportunities for all students to be actively engaged in tasks. 10. Models reading strategies and then provides mini-lessons as a follow up. 11. Forms flexible and fluid instructional groups based on ongoing or formative assessment data. 12. Provide alternative assignments for students who evidence mastery on formative assessments. 13. Invites students to propose alternative ways of accomplishing goals. 14. Uses ‘heads up’ oral reminders to the class to call student attention to potential trouble spots in their tasks and responses. 15. Uses regular ‘teacher talk’ groups as one assessment strategy to gather information about students’ progress. 16. Offers periodic mini-workshops on skills or topics with which students may experience difficulty or on skills or topics designed to push forward the thinking and production of advanced learners. 17. Offers students the option of working alone or with a partner when feasible. 18. Uses rubrics with elements and criteria focused on key content goals as well as personalized elements designed to appropriate challenge various learners and cause them to attend to particular facets of the work important to their own development. 19. Tiers activities when appropriate so that all students are working toward the same goals but at varying levels of difficulty. 20.Offers varied modes of exploring or expressing learning when appropriate. b. The program will target early literacy skills, and the development of oral language proficiency. The instruction will meet the student's level. To start with, the alphabet and phonetic skills will be taught. A great deal of emphasis will be placed on listening and speaking so that the student will understand the basic sounds of the language. The four modalities will be addressed: Speaking: Sentence completion, Storytelling, Picture Description, Social Interaction Listening: Initial Sounds, Picture Identification, Scenarios, Reading: Picture Identification, Picture Identification b. For ELLs who have been in US school less than three years (newcomers) instructional materials that support the learning of ELLs will be utilized (ex. materials that are rich in visuals, and maps that include content from a multicultural world and focus on English language development.) Strong use of realia to demonstrate and explain. Language acquisition instruction is linked to content instruction in Social Studies, Science and Math and includes the use of illustrated word walls. The Science and Art Teacher use illustrated word walls to emphaize content vocabulary. Teachers use illustrated Science and Technology Dictionaries and an Illustrated Math Dictionary. Native speakers, literate in their home language, use bilngual dictionaries and trade books. One More 8  c. ELL's with 4-6 years of service will receive instruction to reinforce their Reading and Writing skills. They are typically first generation Americans and speak fluent English, but speak another langauge at home. Instruction will encourage the developement to improve their understanding of idiomatic phrases and other English expressions which may not come naturally to them. This is also developed through content area instruction and via articulation with mainstream teacher. d. At the present time there are no long term ELL's at P.S. 245. Were there to be any long term ELL's, the program would emphasize writing, academic vocabulary and engagement. Students will be clustered in heterogeneous and rigorous grade-level content classes mixed with English proficient students and taught with differentiated instruction. Students will be engaged in explicit language and literacy development across the curriculum. e. A full range of test accommodations is available to all ELLs and to former ELLs for up to two years after passing the NYSESLAT. Accommodations include: 1. Time extensions (i.e., time and a half of productive test-taking); 2. Separate locations and/or small group administration; 3. Bilingual glossaries and dictionaries (word-for-word translations only); 4. Simultaneous use of English and other available language editions; 5. Oral translations for lower incidence languages (languages for which the city or state have no translated written versions of the test); 6. Written responses in the native language; and, 7. Third reading of listening selections (only for the State English Language Arts assessments). 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELL students with disabilities receive differentiated instruction that follows the Common Core State Standards developed for English Langauge Arts, including English Language Learners. To assist, ELLs meet high academic standards in becoming proficient and literate in English, emphasis is placed on instrucional environments that are language rich and require students to both understand spoken and written words and be able to express that understanding orally and in writing. Vocabulary learning takes place through meaningful participation in the content areas. Support services specifically target explicit literacy instruction across all content areas. Typicall, these students perform below grade level in reading and writing, and as a result, struggle in all content areas that require literacy. These students have different needs from those of newly arrived ELLs and as such they need to be in separate groups from the newcomers. Long-term ELLs need to focus on literacy in English rather than on the development of oral language. Literacy in Content - such as Math, Science, and Social Studies - that focus simultaneously on content and literacy learning are areas of concern. For example, focus may be put on comparing and contrasting across content areas. Classroom teachers are prepared to teach language through content. Practice Books are used to strengthen reading and writing skills. Strategies include: 1. Provides supported reading for students who have difficulty with text material (e.g. reading buddies, taped portions of text, highlighted texts, graphic organizers for distilling text, double entry journals, etc). 2. Introduces key vocabulary through simple definitions and icons or illustrations. 3. Provides English language learners with linguistic buddies, dual-language dictionaries, primary language internet sites, and opportunities for primary language usage for learning. 4. Provides resources at a range of reading levels and at varying degrees of content complexity. 5. Uses small-group instruction to conduct concept attainment lessons. 6. Connects enduring understandings (e.g. big ideas) with a variety of student experiences, cultures, interests, and perspectives during discussions. 7. Uses a variety of techniques to provide participation opportunities for all students to verbally interact (e.g. Think Pair Share, cueing). 9  8. Provides varied homework assignments as needed. 9. Provides opportunities for all students to be actively engaged in tasks. 10. Models reading strategies and then provides mini-lessons as a follow up. 11. Forms flexible and fluid instructional groups based on ongoing or formative assessment data. 12. Provide alternative assignments for students who evidence mastery on formative assessments. 13. Invites students to propose alternative ways of accomplishing goals. 14. Uses ‘heads up’ oral reminders to the class to call student attention to potential trouble spots in their tasks and responses. 15. Uses regular ‘teacher talk’ groups as one assessment strategy to gather information about students’ progress. 16. Offers periodic mini-workshops on skills or topics with which students may experience difficulty or on skills or topics designed to push forward the thinking and production of advanced learners. 17. Offers students the option of working alone or with a partner when feasible. 18. Uses rubrics with elements and criteria focused on key content goals as well as personalized elements designed to appropriate challenge various learners and cause them to attend to particular facets of the work important to their own development. 19. Tiers activities when appropriate so that all students are working toward the same goals but at varying levels of difficulty. 20.Offers varied modes of exploring or expressing learning when appropriate. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Classroom teachers bear a great responsibility in using high-quality research-based instruction that is differentiated for ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment. The RTI is a state mandated general education instruction program model that is used at PS 245. It aims to prevent and gain early intervention through a tiered system of instructional support by adding augmented levels of intructional support to the sandard core curriculum. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Some ELLs require supplemental services to achieve proficiency to meet the New York State Standards in language arts and mathematics. The New York State English Language Arts test results show that these learners are weak in the following literacy skills: finding the main idea, sequencing, drawing conclusions, and making inferences. Extended day activities held twice a week to emphasize academic vocabulary development, critical thinking, and writing skills. Preparing for the New York State English State Language Acquisition Test (NYSESLAT) is another important aspect of the program. math intervention includes an emphasis on math definitions and vocabulary, problem-solving practice, as well as student participation in negotiating meaning for mathematical situations and in mathematical practices that require output from students. Students will develop mathematical reasoning by making conjectures, presenting explanations, and constructing arguments. The software program JIJI is designed to strengthen math reason skills. Academic Intervention Services (AIS) provide support at the school level for students performing below grade-level expectations. Each team consists of educational professionals who determine academic intervention needs of the students in the school, establish targeted means of assessing students, determine methods for dealing with academic issues, and – most important – monitor on an ongoing basis whether these methods are resulting in increased student learning and achievement. These services are delivered through content (Social Studies, Science, Math, ELA) by Mr. Earl Terrill (3-5) and Ms. Andrine Grant (K-2) 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? P.S. 245 will have a Title 3 program that will be implemented, as well as an after school program following extended day Tuesdays and Thursdays. : 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 0  11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELL students are invited to participate in all programs offered at the school, including morning tutorials, after school enrichment, after school homework/recreation programs, trips, art performances, museum visits, and shows. Students and parents are invited directly through classroom teachers to participate in the program. A note, school handout, or flyer is sent to families requiring permission for students to participate. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional Materials and support include: rich visuals, maps, content from around the world (multi-cultural realia) used to demonstrate and explain concepts that are abstract and difficult to understand, sheltered English for Scienceand Social Studies, graphic organized and scaffolding support, students work in dyads and triads, use of charts to break down content. Computer programs include "RAZ Kids" and "MYoN", both which offer trade books with captions and audio enhancement levels A-Z. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language instruction is deilvered through bilingual dictionaries, bilingual glossaries, bilingual libraries and texts, magazines and newspapers, computer software, audio-tapes, and Scholastic News bilingual editions. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All ELLs receive the necessary appropriate and required support based on their age and grade level. Support staff is provided through Teachers College to ensure all services/resources support and correpond to ELLs ages and grade levels. In addition the Math program (Go Math) provide additonal scaffolds for ENL Students. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Instructional Materials and support include: rich visuals, maps, content from around the world (multi-cultural realia) used to demonstrate and explain concepts that are abstract and difficult to understand, sheltered English for Scienceand Social Studies, graphic organized and scaffolding support, students work in dyads and triads, use of charts to break down content. Computer programs include "RAZ Kids" and "MYoN", both which offer trade books with captions and audio enhancement levels A-Z. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We do not currently have any programs. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A 1  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? A miniumum of fifteen percent of the required professional development hours will be dedicated to language acquisition and ELL instruction for all staff, including: common branch teachers, ENL teachers, subject area teachers, paraprofessional, guidance counselors, special education teachers, psychologists, occpational/physical tehrapists, speech therapists, secretaries, and parent coordinators. For all ENL Teachers, PD will be guided and directed by the District (Brooklyn South ELL Support Team) once a month, and information will be turnkeyed at the school building on Monday afternoons between 2:40-3:50pm. In addition, ELL Professional Development will be provided by Teachers College and turnkeyed to all staff members. Professional Development : September 18 : Udnerstanding ELLs: Reaching educator's hearts and minds (Part 1) - Brooklyn South ELL Support Team October 22: Understanding ELLs: Reaching educators' hearts and minds (Part 1) -Brooklyn South Ell Support Team October 23: English Language Learners: Ways to use nonfiction texts to develop oral language and support informational reading - Teachers College Additional (projected) TC PD: Supporting ELLs x3 Professional Development is provided for all personnel who work with ELLs, including paraprofessionals, guidance counselors, psychologists, speech therapists, librarians, coaches, secretarites, and the Parent Coordinator. Professional Development is offered as part of the bi-weekly planning sessions with an Teacher's College constultant, as well as the ELL workshops conducted to meet the mandated training for mainstream teachers and special education teachers. Many of the strategies that are used with ELL students work equally well with non-ELL students. These include vocabulary development, emphasis on reading comprehension strategies, development of oral and listening skills, and modeling. Staff is also encouraged to attend Teachers College trainings and OELL workshops throughout the year. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. - Emphasize positive aspects of middle school. With the move will come more opportunities for individuality and freedom. Students will have increasing choice in elective courses and extracurricular activities. There will be more opportunities to find friends with common interests. - Teach study skills. Help your child begin to self-regulate by breaking down large tasks into manageable pieces and providing (or asking the teacher to provide) guidelines so students can monitor their own progress. Help familiarize your child with using an agenda/assignment book to keep track of daily and long-term assignments. - Scheduled assemblies informing students of middle school, applications, and additional information about their new school. A miniumum of fifteen percent of the required professional development hours will be dedicated to language acquisition and ELL instruction for all staff, including: common branch teachers, ENL teachers, subject area teachers, paraprofessional, guidance counselors, special education teachers, psychologists, occpational/physical tehrapists, speech therapists, secretaries, and parent coordinators. For all ENL Teachers, PD will be guided and directed by the District (Brooklyn South ELL Support Team) once a month, and information will be turnkeyed at the school building on Monday afternoons between 2:40-3:50pm. In addition, ELL Professional Development will be provided by Teachers College and turnkeyed to all staff members. Professional Development : September 18 : Udnerstanding ELLs: Reaching educator's hearts and minds (Part 1) - Brooklyn South ELL Support Team October 22: Understanding ELLs: Reaching educators' hearts and minds (Part 1) -Brooklyn South Ell Support Team October 23: English Language Learners: Ways to use nonfiction texts to develop oral language and support informational reading - Teachers College 2  Additional (projected) TC PD: Supporting ELLs x3 Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The school will provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss the goals of the program on Tuesday afternoons from 2:40 - 3:20, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas at least once a year. In addition to parent-teacher conferences, initial parent orientations, quarterly progress meetings or other scheduled meetings provided for parents or guardians. Translation services are available through the Language Translation Interpretation for all families who require translation at meetings. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents are invited to attend class with their children, PS 245 will be participating in a "Family as Learners" plan. Families will be invited to visit their child’s classroom to see the strategies that are taught to the students. At the completion of classroom visits, parents will be invited to attend a workshop on the Common Core Standards. ELL parents are invited to participate class trips, and volunteer to assist with special events such as the Unity Walk and the Penny Harvest Drive. There are parent meetings which take place throughout the school year. In September and October there are Orientation meetings for ELL parents to introduce them to the school, the curriculum and other extracurricular events. All ELL parent workshops promote the development of English language literacy at home. Translators are avaliable as needed. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 3 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Erica Williams, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 4  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Ms. Erica N. Williams Title Principal N/A Assistant Principal Lynnette Bradshaw Parent Coordinator Mariam Hashimi ENL/Bilingual Teacher Jessica Bennett Parent Earl Terrill Teacher/Subject Area Andrine Grant Teacher/Subject Area Alecia Grant Julia Bove Christine Etienne Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/29/15 10/29/15 10/29/15 10/29/15 10/29/15 10/29/15 10/29/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 10/29/15 10/29/15 10/29/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 5  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 22K245 School Name: PS 245 Superintendent: Julia Bove The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Mariam Hashimi Teacher Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The school determines the primary language spoken by each parent through an informal interview at the time of registration. If this language is not English, a note is made on the emergency card and a Home Language Identification Survey is issued in the appropriate language. If the parent doesn't have literacy skills to read in his//her native language an oral translation is provided by the Spanish (supervising school aide) or Haitian Creole (Parent Coordinator) translator. A list of the parents needing translating services is generated and kept in the main office and the ESL room. Newsletters are sent out in translated versions as necessary. Additionally, the UPPG function in ATS indicates the preferred language. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 6  Language English, Haitian-Creole Written Preferred English, Haitian-Creole 100 50 Spanish Spanish 50 Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 100 50 100 100 50 100 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. n/a Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families School Calendars, Monthly beginning September 2017 - June 2018 School Announcements Monthly beginning September 2017 - June 2018 After-School Programs As needed, October 2017, January 2018 Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. School staff will translate the documents into the necessary languages of Spanish and Haitian- Creole. Staff members will receive all documents to be translated 2 weeks in advance to allow for translation so that they are disseminated in a timely manner. School staff will translate the documents into the necessary languages of Spanish and Haitian- Creole. Staff members will receive all documents to be translated 2 weeks in advance to allow for translation so that they are disseminated in a timely manner. School staff will translate the documents into the necessary languages of Spanish and Haitian- Creole. Staff members will receive all documents to be translated 2 weeks in advance to allow for translation so that they are disseminated in a timely manner. 7  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to September: Parent Teacher Conferences (9/17) September 2017 November: Parent Teacher Conferences (11/17) September & November 2017 March: Parent Teacher conference (3/18) September 2017 & March 2018 May: Parent Teacher Conferences(5/18) September 2017 & May 2018 provide interpretation service(s)? Staff members are paid per session to provide interpretation services. Additionally, teachers and staff members will utilize the DOE's Translation and Interpretation Unit via phone. Staff members are paid per session to provide interpretation services. Additionally, teachers and staff members will utilize the DOE's Translation and Interpretation Unit via phone. Staff members are paid per session to provide interpretation services. Additionally, teachers and staff members will utilize the DOE's Translation and Interpretation Unit via phone. Staff members are paid per session to provide interpretation services. Additionally, teachers and staff members will utilize the DOE's Translation and Interpretation Unit via phone. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 8  The school will utilize our school messenger system where all communications will be translated into the native languages. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. All staff members are trained and provided with a copy of A-663 during the first day of school professional development sessions. At the monthly professional development sessions during the month of and prior to Parent- Teacher's Conferences, A-663 is reviewed. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Parents receive notifications in their home language and are given the opportunity to advise us in advance if they need translation services in the form of an interpreter for meetings or events. Translation and interpretation services are provided in-house to address parental language needs. The services of the Department of Education are utilized in the event that an in-house staff member may not be present. The ESL teacher regularly consults with teachers and the office staff to ascertain whether parents are returning letters, notices, and other communications that have been sent home. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? PS 245 will use the Parent Survey to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services. 9 
