 20K247 School Name: P.S. 247 BROOKLYN Principal: CHRISTOPHER E. OGNO   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: The New York City College Partnership Elementary School 332000010247 Kindergarten through Grade 5 7000 - 21 st Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11204 (718) 236-4205 School Number (DBN): 20K247 (718) 331-8563 Phone Number: Melissa Sheredos Fax: Email Address: msheredos@schools.nyc.gov Christopher E. Ogno Sue Meyerson Jamie Betancourt Phyllis Illiano Sue Meyerson NA NA NA School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 20 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Karina Costantino Superintendent: 415 89 th Street, Brooklyn, NY KCostan@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 759-4912 Phone Number: 718 759-4842 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Brooklyn FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Mauricière De Govia Executive Director: 415 89th Street MDegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 759-4862 Phone Number: Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Christopher E. Ogno Sue Meyerson Phylis Guadagno-Illiano Ivy Bursic Jamie Betancourt Elena DelRe Dana Hunter Mary Czado Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ School Secretary   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Hana Hammood Karina Marcillo Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? PS 247 strives to ensure that all students receive a rigorous, high quality, well-rounded education that will serve as a solid foundation for future success.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Public School 247 is an urban high performing elementary school located in Bensonhurst, Brooklyn. It is a school with approximately 880 students in kindergarten to grade 5. P.S. 247 is a Title I school with 69% of its students qualifying for free lunch. The schools population is ethnically diverse with 26 languages represented. Our success has been built on rigorous education aligned to the Common Core Standards and our school-wide initiative which is to reduce the number of students in all instructional settings. It is our belief that students learn best from the direct one-to-one or small group teacher interactions. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our goal has been to increase opportunities for direct small group instruction in every available setting. In the out-of-classroom intervention settings the school has Reading Recovery (1:1 student-to-teacher ratio), Leveled Literacy Intervention (1:3 teacher-to-student ratio), Academic Intervention Services (AIS) math groups (1:6 teacher-to-student ratio) and AIS reading groups (1:6 teacher-to-student ratio). In mandated pullout services such as English Language Learners ( ELL) or Special Education Support Services (SETSS) we encourage a workshop model setting so students are met with in small groups for guided reading or strategy lessons. In the classroom, we utilize the workshop model and children are constantly being met with individually to confer or in small groups for strategy or guided reading lessons. AIS services push in or pull out to support small group work. Paraprofessionals in the classroom receive professional learning on instruction and are responsible for supporting instruction for small groups of children within the classroom. We believe that this commitment to lowering the student-to-teacher ratio at every opportunity best supports our mantra, “a child’s needs come first" The mission of Public School 247: The New York City College Partnership School, is to cultivate a climate of growth for all members of its community. We teach with passion and compassion, creating a learning environment that encourages conversation and exploration and celebrates the gifts and talents of each child. To that end, a high premium is placed on professional growth through professional development in order to provide instruction that is effective, relevant, engaging and well-rounded. There is a strong culture of collaboration among teachers and the administration. Our ELL population is the largest subgroup in our school. We have been very successful in meeting our student subgroups’ needs. Beyond the aforementioned after-school and Saturday programs those ELL students who are academically behind receive small group AIS on-going instruction. Our school has also utilized its ELL staff to turnkey ELL training and techniques to all staff, over the past 2 years, to better serve our ELL students. Technology has been purchased, including smart boards in every classroom to support our ELL population. On-line interactive sites and programs (i.e., Imagine Learning, PebbleGo, MyOn, BrainPop, etc.) have also been purchased to support our ELLs through technology. Our special education population is supported through SETSS. They receive all of the supports that our ELL students receive in addition to their mandated services. After-school programs are available for students at PS 247. The PS 247 after-school program offers help for our ELL students two days a week. During the testing season we have a Saturday Academy that all students are invited to attend. This academy consists of six Saturdays before the NYS ELA and Math Assessment. These classes focus on test sophistication. PS 247 has many wonderful programs in place. A wireless laptop and iPad program consists over 20 rolling technology labs used throughout the school. They each contain at least 20 laptop computers or iPads, which the teachers integrate into the curriculum. These computers and iPads have Internet connectivity. A family literacy program organized and run by our parent coordinator provides classes in English for parents, as well as a citizenship class. She also arranges workshops, meetings, and conferences for parents. Trips are arranged and materials are provided. We also have an active parents association which provides the school with many special events and activities for the students. The parents association holds monthly meetings, raises funds, assists in the instructional program, accompanies students on trips and provides support for the school and its administration. Some of the activities that have been coordinated by the parent's association include: School Book Fair, Penny Auction, Build-a-Buddy 0  Workshop, Family Game Night, Mothers' Day and Fathers' Day Sales, Gift giving during Holiday Season, Staff Appreciation Luncheon and many others. After-school programs are available for students at PS 247. The PS 247 after-school program offers help for our ELL students two days a week. During the testing season we have a Saturday Academy that all students are invited to attend. This academy consists of eight Saturdays before the NYS ELA and Math Assessment. Once again, these classes focus on test sophistication. The Neighborhood Improvement Association (NIA) runs a full time after-school program servicing grades K-5. This afternoon recreational program sponsored by Neighborhood Improvement Association (NIA) provides students with an opportunity to learn math, literacy and leadership skills through games, as well as homework help and tutoring. The program runs from 2:40 p.m. through 5:40 p.m. daily. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our greatest progress this year in the Framework for Great Schools has been “Strong Family and Community Ties”. We have seen a tremendous increase in the number of parents in our building throughout the school year. This has been most evident in the Parent/Teacher Association meetings where attendance has increase by tenfold. Our focus for the 2018/19 year will be strengthening “Strong Family and Community Ties”. We will continue our work to improve this area since both parents and staff identified this area as an area of need in our latest school environmental survey. It is essential that we message clearly the opportunities available for parents to be active participants in their child’s learning. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 20K247 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 873 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 1 1 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 48 45 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 66.0% % Attendance Rate 64.5% % Reduced Lunch 28.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.6% 12.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 35.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 13.09 0% 8% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 68.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 99% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) Yes Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A YES N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 99 98 95.5% 0.9% 17.2% 0.3% 50.6% 0.6% 4 2% 10.3 76.6% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As per the Quality Review, our school has collaboratively created a rigorous curriculum across grades and subject areas, aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS), enduring student engagement and meeting the needs of all learners. The rating form for the school’s 2015 Quality Review indicates “well developed” scores for all components related to the instructional core. Our data on the NYS ELA exam reflects this as follows: 1) A 3% increase in all students performing at or above grade level standards in ELA. 2) A 6% increase in all students with disabilities performing at or above grade level standards in ELA. 3) A 6% increase in all English Language Learners scoring at or above grade level standards in ELA. Given our large ELL population, our large SWD population and our school’s performance on the New York State standardized exams in Math and ELA, improving ELA remains the focus of our school. Though we far exceed the city-wide average for proficiency on the New York State ELA exam, we recognize that literacy is our area of need. Our proficiency rate on the New York State Math exam far exceeds our proficiency rate on the New York State ELA exam (over 20% higher). We strive to reach new heights and, with that in mind, we need to reach more children through our inquiry work and our professional development. We must continually hone our craft to meet the needs of every student entrusted to our care. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. To increase achievement in literacy for all students in grades K-5 through Common Core-aligned curriculum and instruction project-based learning opportunities with scaffolds and supports for all students; including students with disabilities, English language learners, and advanced students as evidenced by teacher observations and Advance 1e and 3c. By June 2019 90% of all teachers will receive a rating of effective or highly effective on observations in Advance 1e and 3c. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  To increase student achievement in literacy through curriculum aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS), we will continue to implement literacy and content area tasks. The tasks require students to read and analyze informational texts and, in response, write explanatory texts as well as provide arguments to support claims. Teachers will participate in a variety of professional development workshops focusing on strategies to enhance literacy instruction for all learners incorporating Universal Design for Learning (UDL) and ENL strategies. Literacy workshops will focus on the analysis and unpacking of the CCLS, using formative assessment during instruction to evaluate student learning and progress. Teachers will participate in ongoing workshops to ensure the alignment across grades to the CCLS, differentiate instruction for all learners and help students meet the rigorous demands of the standards. Teachers will investigate and implement inquiry work on all grades to support all learners. Our school will engage families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and the New York State Learning Standards in order to increase student achievement and support their children at home. Parents are provided assistance in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments during PTA meetings. Parents will also engage in a workshop outlining our Advanced Literacy initiative. A review of the New York State Learning Standards and the steps our school is taking to align curriculum to meet the standards is provided for parents. Parents are also provided user names and passwords for various literacy websites and research databases such as Raz Kids, PebbleGo, MyOn, Brainpop, etc. so they can work with their children at home. Additionally, parents are Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Key personnel used to implement this strategy will be classroom, content area, and Reading teachers Administrators and Lead teachers K-5 students including English as a New Language students (ENLs) and Students with Disabilities (SWDs) Performance tasks in literacy and the content areas will be administered 3 times during the 2018-2019 school year. Beginning in September of 2018 and ending in June of 2019 All Teachers On-going throughout the 2018-2019 school year. Beginning in September of 2018 and ending in June of 2019 Families September 2018 through June 2019 All teachers, Administration, PTA and the Parent Coordinator 4 provided with information and resources during parent workshops regarding the changes in the New York State assessments and the expectations for their children. The parents are provided with a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that they can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress. Monthly grade curriculum letters, math assessments, students’ reading levels as well as reading and writing goals are sent home to advise the parents of the units of study being taught at school and how their children are performing. Our school is engaged around work in Advanced Literacy in many ways. Beginning in professional learning groups, we researched and planned scaffolds and modifications to support our SWD's and ELL students which are aligned to our literacy curriculum on all grade levels. For example, we created vocabulary slides with illustrations, parts of speech and kid-friendly definitions to support understanding, class discussions and responses to literature aligned to our read aloud texts. Our close reading activities that accompany each unit follow a protocol and provide SWD's and ELL students an opportunity to be engaged in thinking work around complex texts with the support of the teacher and classmates. Close Reading lessons reinforce reading strategies embedded in the literacy units and also have scaffolds and supports aligned to support our SWD's and ELL's, such as photographs, graphic organizers and anchor charts to give them access to grade level content and curriculum. Throughout all aspects of our literacy curriculum, we have literature available at lower Lexile levels which are aligned to the same content, learning intentions and tasks to support students to reach grade level standards. Finally, we have support staff push-in on every grade level to provide additional small group instruction to support and scaffold SWD and ELL students. This enables content and strategies to be frontloaded to students so that they are prepared and ready to engage in grade level content. All administrators, teachers and paraprofessionals K-5 students including English as a New Language students (ENLs) and Students with Disabilities (SWDs) On-going throughout the 2018-2019 school year. Beginning in September of 2018 and ending in June of 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. As a PROSE school we will utilize parent time in the classroom. Parents will visit and view literacy and math lessons first hand to understand the curriculum and instructional rigor of the classroom. In addition parents will be invited to a variety of curriculum based workshops throughout the year. Classroom teachers, coaches and administrators will be responsible for implementation. The classroom visits by parents in both literacy and math will begin in September 2018 through June 2019. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 5  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Our school will utilize programming initiatives Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Our school will engage in progress monitoring as a part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Mid-point benchmarks that will indicate school progress toward meeting our goal are as follows: A review of lesson plans, grade conference agendas and Advance observations, specifically ratings in Advance 1e and 3c. By February 2019 85% of all teachers will receive a rating of effective or highly effective on observations in Advance 1e and 3c. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Advance observations and teacher lesson plans Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Small group instruction and inquiry work is vital to the success of all students. Incorporating this work has become a greater focus of school staff due to larger class sizes and the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Inquiry work has been and remains the core focus initiative of District 20. It is the District vision that as schools engage in Inquiry work they will begin to unlock new ways to reach every child. Our School's Strengths: Inquiry, formative and summative assessments are embedded into school instruction   Teacher team meetings are used to analyze student data to form small group instruction  Vertical teams are used to analyze student data to form goals for small group instruction  PROSE school initiative implemented for the 17-18 school year has brought back extended day small group instruction for our most at-risk students. Our School's Needs: Scheduled periods added or embedded into school day to meet with small groups   Additional teacher planning time to continually adjust small group sizes, students and focus  Continued focus on inquiry work across each grade, small group instruction and inquiry work is vital to the success of all students. Incorporating this work has become a greater focus of school staff due to larger class sizes and the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will increase planning and implementation of small group instruction supported by professional development and inquiry work. This will establish a community where all students, especially our large ENL population and SWD students will feel safe, supported and challenged. 95% of all classrooms will receive Academic 7  Intervention Support (AIS) from an AIS provider enabling small group work. This will be measured by reviewing teacher programs and by student progress on formal and informal assessments. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). We will be hiring F-status teachers across all grade levels to support small group instruction and Inquiry. We will bring in teachers with specialized training (i.e., Fundations, Orton Gillingham, Reading Recovery, etc.) These teachers will support the diversity of learners within our school community. AIS teachers will have the ability to frontload content and strategies for our most at-risk students (ENL and SWD students)so that they are prepared and ready to engage in grade level content. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 1. Level Sept. 2018 1, 2 and 3 Students through June 2019 F-status teachers, coaches, AIS staff and administrators All administrators, teachers and paraprofessionals All administrators, teachers and paraprofessionals On-going throughout the 2018-2019 school year. Beginning in September of 2018 and ending in June of 2019 On-going throughout the 2018-2019 school year. Beginning in September of 2018 and ending in June of 2019 Teachers will participate in a variety of professional development workshops focusing on strategies to enhance literacy instruction for all learners incorporating Universal Design for Learning (UDL) and ENL strategies. Literacy workshops will focus on the analysis and unpacking of the CCLS, using formative assessment during instruction to evaluate student learning and progress. Teachers will participate in ongoing workshops to ensure the alignment across grades to the CCLS, differentiate instruction for all learners and help students meet the rigorous demands of the standards. Teachers will investigate and implement inquiry work on all grades to support all learners. K-5 students including English as a New Language students (ENLs) and Students with Disabilities (SWDs) Our school will engage families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and the CCLS in order to increase student achievement and support their children at home. Parents are provided assistance in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments during PTA meetings. Parents are also provided user names and passwords for various literacy websites and research databases such as Raz Kids, PebbleGo, MyOn, Brainpop, etc. so they can work with their children at home. Additionally, parents are provided with information and resources during parent workshops regarding the changes in the New York State assessments and the expectations for their children. The parents are provided with a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that they can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress. Monthly grade curriculum letters, math assessments, students’ reading levels as well as reading and writing goals are sent home to advise the parents of the units of study being taught at school and how their children are performing. Parents are invited into classrooms on-going throughout the school year to participate in K-5 English as a New Language students (ENLs), Students with Disabilities (SWDs) Students and at-risk students. 9 writing celebrations, to work with their children as Math Partners and Reading Partners. This affords parents the opportunity to observe and participate in instruction, giving them a better understanding of their child as a learner. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. AIS providers will be in contact with parents through letters, parent meetings and phone calls. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Our school will utilize programming initiatives. Hire F-status staffing looking at retired teachers and teachers on leave. As a PROSE school we will utilize extended time on Tuesdays through Thursdays to provide additional academic support and enrichment. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded X In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019 65% of all classrooms will be matched and receive services from an AIS provider and or extended day AIS as evidenced by data derived from teacher programs and planning documents indicating small group instruction and inquiry work. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Our school will engage in progress monitoring as a part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Mid-point benchmarks that will indicate school progress toward meeting our goal are as follows: teacher formal and informal observations, fall and spring tasks and Monitoring for Results, teacher observation forms and AIS providers schedules. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The District 20 focus for Schools during the 2015 and 16 school year has been Inquiry work for SWD students in grades K-5. All District 20 schools were required to target 3-5 students per grade for Inquiry work. In our school that meant 40% of our teaching staff was required to be engaged in Inquiry work. The collaboration of teachers is very high with a minimum of 3 weekly common preps. The rating from for the school’s 2015 Quality Review indicates “well developed” scores in all components of the Quality Review. This indicates that our school has the the collaborative structures in place to successfully expand our inquiry work throughout the school. ELL and SWD students were our lowest performing subgroups on the 2017 New York State Exams. A 3 year review of testing data shows that these subgroups struggle in performance when compared to their general education peers. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of full time teachers will participate in collaborative Inquiry work. This will be evidenced by teachers designing multiple entry points for ELLs and SWD students as measured by Inquiry Team agendas, Grade Conference agendas, School-wide inquiry initiative planning sheets and Attendance Sheets. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Inquiry team work will take place on common preparation periods (minimum of three per grade weekly). Teachers will engage in inquiry studies; reviewing relevant data, researching relevant information, designing implementation, implementing practice, collecting data, reviewing results and implications and modifying practices accordingly. Inquiry Team will meet during the Block time to insure that all constituents (parents, classroom teachers, out- of-classroom teachers and service providers can have input. Parent workshops will be given throughout the year to support and inform parents of instructional shifts related to Inquiry. This will increase parental capacity in supporting their child's academics at home 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Classroom teachers September 2018 through June 2019 Grade Leaders, Assistant principals and Coaches Parents Teachers, Service providers Parents Teachers, Students September 2018 through June 2019 September 2018 through June 2019 Grade Leaders, Assistant principals and Coaches Teachers, Assistant principals, coaches and Parent Coordinator How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent workshops will be given throughout the year to support and inform parents of instructional shifts related to Inquiry. This will increase parental capacity in supporting their child's academics at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will leverage the extended time with parents. We will utilize PTA meetings to conduct workshops. We will provide Block Coverage for teachers to vertically plan and share. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Review of Attendance sheets in February of 2019 will indicate that a minimum of 85% of full time staff will be engaged in inquiry work. Up from 80% of teachers last year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Sign-in sheets from Inquiry Team Meetings and Danielson Observations in Advance Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As indicated in 4.2 (Engage in structured professional collaborations on teams using an inquiry approach that promotes shared leadership and focuses on improved student learning) of our 2015 Quality Review Report , "The vast majority of teachers are engaged in inquiry-based structured professional collaborations that promote improved teacher pedagogical capacity while promoting CCLS. Teacher teams systematically analyze key elements of teacher work including classroom practice, assessment data, and student work." A review of teachers responses in our most recent school survey focused on development of students social/emotional skills which indicate that there may be opportunities to strengthen students self regulation and self advocacy skills. It is clear that from this analysis our school is ready to take the next step in empowering our teachers. We believe that increased teacher training around mindfulness and social emotional will expand our teachers capabilities. We believe that in order to reach subgroups which are trailing in performance, specifically our ELL Students and our Students with disabilities we need to train teachers in utilizing social emotional connections to enhance our curriculum and curriculum development. Students in these identified sub-groups show lower growth on NY State assessments across both Math and Reading. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will build coherent instructional and social-emotional supports to improve student achievement for all students, including English language learners, students with disabilities and advanced students measured by at least a 3% overall increase in ELA State exam scores, Math State exam scores, running records, DRA assessments, EngageNY assessments, writing portfolios and rubrics. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Administrative Cabinet will meet in September 2018 to identify opportunities for teachers to continue to be trained and turn- key social emotional techniques to colleagues. September opening staff conference will kick off social emotional training of staff. Teachers selected to serve in turn key roles September 2018-June 2019 The creation of Turn Key Professional Development Teacher Leadership positions will include a lead teachers throughout the building New Social emotional training of staff will be leveraged to provide support for our parents. Teacher leaders will make recommendations and co construct and design parent workshops to support the school-wide initiative. The school is implementing "The Leader in Me" program. Teachers selected to serve in leadership roles Teachers selected to serve as teacher leaders and parents Students in grades K-2 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Teachers selected to serve as teacher leaders, administrative and coaching staff. Teachers selected to serve as teacher leaders, administrative and coaching staff. Teachers selected to serve as teacher leaders, administrative staff,coaching staff and parents. September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, para professionals and administrators. How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will receive training in school-wide initiatives including social-emotional training. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources include schedule adjustment to allow for a weekly block coverage to allow for teacher teams to meet together resulting in vertical planning. Professional development will be provided by administrators, teachers and 5  outside agencies. The Leader in Me program to promote social emotional growth has been purchased for the entire school. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, a minimum of 2 social emotional trainings will take place for staff. Agendas and meeting notes from at least 2 meetings reflecting social emotional training will show progress toward meeting this goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Agendas and meeting notes Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school has very strong family and community ties. We have focused this past year on family engagement and bringing more parents into our school. We run many events that open our doors to parents and our community. We run multiple activities throughout the school year including, but not limited to, Parents-as-Math-and-Reading Partners, Writing Celebrations for all students at least 5 times a year, monthly PTA meetings, Fall and Spring concerts, Parent Workshops and events (i.e., Penny Auction, Family Nights, Art Partnership Programs, etc.) In our annual Environmental Survey parents indicated the following, in regards to being invited to an event at their child’s school: 26% of those surveyed said they were invited 5 or more times to their child’s school. 38% of those surveyed said they were invited 3 to 4 times to their child’s school. 28% of those surveyed said they were invited 1 to 2 times to their child’s school. 8% of those surveyed said they were never invited to their child’s school. We need to ensure that in the future we message opportunities to parents in a more global way. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 50% of all PTA Meetings (5 out of 10 meetings) will include presentations and information sessions facilitated by a community-based organization , community partners or Parent Coordinator as reported by agenda and minutes documents. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Our school will continue to design innovative ways to provide families with notification of upcoming workshops and meetings. All monthly calendars and notices of meetings will be sent home to families in multiple languages in an effort to reach our diverse school community. We will display a list of all the family events happening for the month in the front corridor for parent awareness. In an effort to increase parent participation, questionnaires will be sent home to families, in all languages, with possible workshop ideas for parents to choose what presentations and workshops will benefit their needs. PTA meetings will include presentations and information sessions facilitated by community-based organizations and community partners. These will include Dial-A-Teacher workshops to help families help their children with homework and problem solving strategies. The Center for Integrated Teacher Education (CITE) will cover topics such as Helping Your ENL Children Learn English and Understanding the Common Core Learning Standards. NYC Parent Partnership will offer information sessions about special education, Individual Education Plans (IEPs), learning disabilities as well as provides resources for parents to support their children at home. Key teachers will organize workshops for the parents and families based on need. Teachers will access student learning and outcomes to design workshops and information sessions that can help parents help their children at home. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Families September 2018-June 2019 PTA, Parent Coordinator and Administration Families Families September 2018-June 2019 PTA, Parent Coordinator and Administration September 2018-June 2019 PTA, Parent Coordinator and Administration Families September 2018-June 2019 PTA, Teachers, Parent Coordinator and Administration If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. NIA Community Service Network - BEACON Program for 2018-2019 will be doing more middle school, high school and adult programs. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 8  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan are as follows: PTA, Parent Coordinator, administrators and presenters for workshops Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Our school will engage in progress monitoring as a part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Mid-point benchmarks that will indicate school progress toward meeting our goal are attendance sheets and agendas from parent workshops and PTA meetings. By February 2019 a minimum of 2 parent workshop will have been given after a PTA meeting. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Agendas and attendance sheets Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group, one-to-one, tutoring, pull-out and push-in for all grades. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day, after-school and on Saturdays Small Group Instruction Small Group Instruction Small Group Instruction 1:1, Small Group Instruction During the school day, after-school and on Saturdays During the school day During the school day During the school day Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Not Meeting Grade Level Standards Mathematics Not Meeting Grade Level Standards Science All Students Social Studies All Students Anyone that Needs Support At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Instruction provided to small groups of students by classroom teachers in ELA. Fundations, Reading Recovery, Orton Gillingham, Guided Reading, Push-in AIS Program and Pull-out AIS programs for all grades. Small group instruction, Push-in and pull-out AIS Program (Grades 1-5) Reading in the content area Reading in the content area The school guidance counselor provides one-on-one services as well as meeting with students in a small groups addressing the following skills: social, peer socialization, boundaries, appropriate classroom behavior, 0  and fulfilling responsibilities. The school psychologist provides one-on- one service to students as needed. These services include but are not limited to social and emotional issues. 1  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 0 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Funds are provided for class trips, school supplies, clothing and other needs. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). Title 1 school 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2  Title 1 school 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. Title 1 school 3  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. All of the teachers at P.S. 247 are Highly Qualified Teachers. P.S. 247 has partnerships with 22 Colleges. These partnerships provide us with a pool of candidates from which to draw our future staff members. P.S. 247 offers a wide variety of professional development and workshops for teachers. These workshops provide training and support in reading, writing, math and technology as well as science and the arts. The professional development sessions and workshops are held throughout the school year and provide teachers the support they need to refine instructional practices. Additionally, teachers are given the opportunity to request professional development in areas that align to their professional goals. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). To ensure all students meet the Common Core State Standards, teachers, administrators, paraprofessionals and other school-based staff regularly receive professional development around the CCLS. Professional development workshops that focus on reading, writing, math and technology instruction for all learners are provided by outside facilitators. Teachers meet in grade teams and with administrators during common prep periods, grade conferences and weekly collaboration periods to address instructional strategies to meet the CCLS. Our school participates in the Instructional Leads conferences to ensure we are kept abreast regarding NYC Instructional Expectations to meet the CCLS. Additionally, teachers and administrators attend and provide workshops regarding the Danielson framework, which highlights best instructional practices for teachers to help their students meet the demands of the CCLS. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Not Applicable 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 4  Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Not Applicable Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). In September, teachers will engage students in stories, songs and chants to help ease the transition into kindergarten. They will establish routines for children giving the children a sense of security. Students will have the opportunity to explore the classroom, play in centers and socialize with other children. Pre-K students are given a tour of the building and introduced to teachers and staff who are important to the school community. Additionally, teachers will have parents answer some questions about their children in an effort to learn about his/her habits, likes, dislikes, favorite things to do and special talents. In June, our school will provide a Kindergarten Orientation for the parents of Pre-K students as well as the newly enrolled Kindergarten students. During this time, the children have the opportunity to experience the “new” Kindergarten classroom environment. The children play in centers, sift through books, sing songs, draw and socialize with other children. The parents meet the Kindergarten teachers and have the opportunity to take a tour of the classrooms. The parents are also provided with a summary of the curriculum, websites to access resources and a book to read aloud with their children at home. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers participate in the decision-making process regarding the use and selection of appropriate assessment measures as well as professional development regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers meet in teams during common prep periods and weekly collaboration periods to select and review various performance tasks as well as content area tests for implementation. Teachers also meet during these allotted times to review student work samples and use the data to guide instruction. Teachers are also represented on the MOSL committee and participate in decisions regarding school-wide assessments. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount 5  each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal $552,755.00 Title II, Part A Federal Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 91,764.00 33,102.00 0 5,737,082 X X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) Sections 5A, 5B, 5D, 5C, 5E Sections 5A, 5B, 5D, 5C, 5E Sections 5A,5D 5C, 5E , Section 5D Sections 5A, 5B, 5D, 5C, 5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used 6  conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 7  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy 7000 - 21st Avenue Brooklyn , New York 11204 (718) 236-4205 FAX (718) 331-8563 Today’s Students Are Tomorrow’s Leaders Christopher E. Ogno Erin O’Hanlon Diana Olsen Principal Assistant Principal Assistant Principal Parent Involvement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 247, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. 7000 - 21st Avenue Brooklyn , New York 11204 (718) 236-4205 FAX (718) 331-8563 Today’s Students Are Tomorrow’s Leaders 8  Christopher E. Ogno Erin O’Hanlon Diana Olsen Principal Assistant Principal Assistant Principal Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students P.S. 247 will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; 9  ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office. ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; 0  ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 247 ,in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; 1  ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences, Parents as Reading and Math Partners, Parent workshops, PTA meetings, Children’s Writing Celebrations, etc.; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; 2  ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 3  ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 4  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 5  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The Title III after school/Saturday ELL program serves identified ELL students who are at the entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding, and commanding level, those in the "newcomer" subgroup, and those who are determined to be “at risk” of not meeting standards in grades 1-5. Approximately 45 students will be included in the 3 after school sections, while Saturday program sections are open to all English Language Learners in all grades K-5, at all levels (entering, emerging, transitioning, and expanding). We will also have a Saturday Academy, open to all ELLs (entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding, and commanding), at no cost to Title III. Students will be invited to the Title III ENL program by way of invitation letter sent out with students to parents, and all letters inviting children will be translated into the parents native language, and sent home in the native language. Attendance will be recorded daily. The Title III ENL program will begin on January 11th and end on April 6th, for a total of 22 days. There will be 3 Saturday sessions as well, resulting in 25 sessions total. The program will run from 2:40 pm until 4:40 pm, 2 days per week on Wednesday and Thursday. The after school program section will be taught by 3 fully certified ENL teachers. The Saturday program is a field trip component, with 3 full day Saturday trips, open to all ELL students at all levels (entering, emerging, transitioning, and expanding). (We will also have a Saturday Academy, also open to all ELL students [entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding, and commanding], at no cost to Title III.) Each trip will be approximately 6 hours in duration. 3 fully certified ENL teachers will chaperone the trips, along with 1 supervisor. Parents will be asked to be chaperones as needed at no cost to Title III. The total number of trip hours will be 18 hours per teacher/supervisor. The students will be taught the English language through standalone ENL instruction, employing thematic units spanning the content areas aligned with the Common Core Standards. Within the units there will be hands-on content based activities, grammar and language development, literacy support with close reading with challenging discussion and questioning, as well as integrated NYSESLAT test preparation. The school-wide instructional focus is small group instruction, conferencing, problem solving and differentiation for ELLs and students with disabilities. Specific topics explored will be endangered animals, animal habitats around the world, planting and growing, and natural resources. Engaging themes such as these encourage language 6  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information development with lessons focusing on all 4 proficiency areas: listening, speaking, reading, and writing. The units of study are cross-curricular, covering a wide variety of subject areas and topics such as: Science in the study of animal habitats, environmental problems and solutions, planting and growing, and natural resources; and social studies in the study of the seven continents and where in the world we find certain animals/habitats, and ways in which students can take social action to help animals, people, and habitats in need. Literacy will be supported through the use of books, articles, excerpts from higher lexile texts, student writing in response to each of these topics, and project based learning. NYSESLAT test prep will be integrated through targeted speaking activities, listening activities, reading comprehension questions and activities, and writing responses. Activities and assignments are designed to enhance high level thinking, discussion, and reflection among students. Field trips will be educational and supportive of and supplemental to thematic units studied in the after school program. The children in the Title III Saturday program will be visiting the following institutions over the course of the program: The Central Park Zoo, The New York Aquarium, and the Brooklyn Botanical Garden. These trips support our studies of topics such as endangered animals, animal habitats around the world, planting and growing, and natural resources. Central Park Zoo and New York Aquarium house many animals that are currently on endangered species lists, and also make a great effort at conservation of these species. Additionally, visiting these institutions correlates with our studies of animal habitats. The Brooklyn Botanical Garden has various plants and habitats and will engage students in deeper thinking about the environment correlating to the planting and growing unit. Lastly, many of the children in the Saturday program are newly arrived immigrants. These excursions are often their first experiences around New York City. For this reason, the trips are not only supportive of our studies in the after school program, but are valuable cultural experiences for the children and parents, and help to acquaint them with their new city and community. Each trip is completely free of charge for the children and parents, with admission and travel costs covered by Title III. In this way, no child misses out on these experiences due to financial hardship. The Saturday program will include snacks for students without any cost to Title III. After each trip, teachers bring the learning experience back to the classroom. Teachers plan written responses, review photos of the trip and help the children make connections to their learning, by asking higher order questions that enable discussion and reflection while promoting oral language development and literacy. According to NYSESLAT data from previous years, all ELLs who participated in the Title III after school and Saturday programs moved up in proficiency level, or within the proficiency level. Additionally, based on both ENL and general education teacher formal and informal assessments, a supplemental program using ENL strategies that focuses on language, literacy, and content area development has helped to support ELLs in their acquisition of the English language, and literacy development. Research shows that effective afterschool programs provide ELLs with a chance to become active learners in a highly engaging low-stakes environment. Afterschool programs are an opportunity to include Common Core principles in order to build upon student growth expectation. Hands-on learning experiences and long term projects require students to think deeper and critically, ask questions and learn content and to collaborate and communicate with their peers. Mistakes are used as learning opportunities to grow. 7  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Materials used in instruction are the following: -National Geographic Reach and National Geographic Science, for content and literacy development for ELLs. Program offers opportunities for beginning ELLs to build background knowledge, develop vocabulary and oral language and learn grade-level content. -Rigby On Our Way to English, which is a literacy-based language development program designed to support students in both literacy and the content areas. -Multicultural literature that connect to the children’s cultures, cultural studies, and curricular content. - Content-based literature that support our content studies. - Technological resources such as using personal laptops and iPads for internet research writing, the use of Smartboards for interactive learning, videos for instructional support, and Microsoft word for project publishing. - Hands on activities and interactive materials, such as realia, science experiments and activities (i.e. planting) that enhance and support students' metacognitive skills. -Songs and poems that connect to our studies and support language development through rhythm and repetition. - Craft activities that support learning, allow students to practice following oral and written directions, and that make learning fun and engaging. -Bilingual books that support literacy in both the native and target language. Most of these instructional materials are at no cost to Title III. Supplemental materials such as Non-fiction texts, project supplies (such as printer paper, pencils, pens, notebooks), and hands on materials (such as plants, soil and seeds) will be purchased using Title III funds. The program requires the hiring of one supervisor to oversee the after school and Saturday programs. In addition to funding supervisor and teacher per session for instruction, materials and supplies will be ordered, and funds will be used for transportation and admission to trip locations. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: ENL teachers will attend professional development related to Title III Instruction (supporting ELLs in literacy and language development) throughout the year from various sources and providers. All professional development will be at no cost to Title III. 1. ENL Teachers (Title III teachers) and general education teachers will attend ongoing workshops held by school administration, literacy coaches, and grade leaders (Christoper E. 8  Part C: Professional Development Ogno, Erin O'Hanlon, Diana Olsen, Mary Toner and Stephanie Spatola). The workshop series will take place once a week for 45 minutes throughout the school year. Workshop topics will be informed by our inquiry work, and are currently tentative, but may include developing success criteria, supporting ELLs in the common core standards, looking at student work, developing an action plan based on student work and corresponding data, implementing the close reading protocol, developing mid and end assessments, helping students to become assessment capable learners, self-assessment, peer-assessment, writing rubrics, calibrating student work, and inquiry protocols. ENL/Title III teachers' focus throughout the professional development will be the application of topics for subgroups of ELLs. The strategies learned and acquired during the series will have a positive and lasting impact on teachers' performance in classrooms. This professional development will be at no cost to Title III. The tentative schedule of workshops is below, topics of later dates are to be determined based on need Ongoing future professional development will be based on student needs throughout the school year. All professional development will be at no cost to Title III.: September: 9/19-Inquiry Protocols (Literacy Coaches) 9/20- Supporting newcomer ELLs in the classroom/Assessing newcomer ELLs in reading (Literacy Coach) 9/26-Writing Success Criteria (Literacy Coaches) October: 10/17- Co-constructing success criteria (Grade Leaders) 10/24- Looking at student work/Looking at ELL work (Administrator/ENL Teacher) 11/2- Calibrating student work (Literacy Coaches) November: 11/7- Developing an action plan based on student work/Developing action plans with ELLs in mind 11/14- Developing mid assessments/Developing mid assessments for ELLs 11/21- Developing end assessments/Developing end assessments for ELLs 11/28- Close reading protocol December: 12/5- Assessment capable learners 12/12- self-assessment 12/19- peer-assessment January: 1/9- Developing rubrics 1/23- TBD 1/30- TBD February: 2/6- TBD 2/13-TBD 2/27-TBD 9  Part C: Professional Development March: 3/6-TBD 3/13-TBD 3/20-TBD 3/27-TBD April: 4/3-TBD 4/24-TBD May: 5/1-TBD 5/8-TBD 5/15-TBD 5/22-TBD June: 6/5-TBD 6/12-TBD 6/19-TBD 6/26-TBD 2. ENL teachers will meet with administrators (Erin O'Hanlon and Diana Olsen) bi-weekly for planning and professional development. Content covered at these sessions are tentatively listed below. Topics of later dates are TBD based on need: 9/20- Supporting newcomer ELLs in the classroom/Assessing newcomer ELLs in reading (Literacy Coach) 9/22- ELL programming and CR Part 154 (Administrator) 10/13- ENL instruction, collaboration with classroom teachers (Administrator) 10/27- Developing ELL assessments (Administrator) 11/10- Action plans for ELLs (Administrator) 11/24- Developing end assessments for ELLs (Administrator) 12/8- Small group work with ELLs (Administrator) 12/22- TBD 1/12- TBD 1/26- TBD 2/9- TBD 3/2- TBD 3/16- TBD 3/30- TBD 4/20- TBD 5/4- TBD 5/18- TBD 6/1- TBD 6/22- TBD 0  Part C: Professional Development 3. ENL Teachers/Title III teachers (Alison DuBois-Eker, Dina Napolitano, and Loredana Torelli) will attend workshops held by the UFT ENL/Bilingual Committee throughout the year. Meetings are held monthly during after school hours. These workshops help teachers to build skill in working with ELLs. Workshops focus on literacy development, language strategies, vocabulary building, and content area instruction. Workshops are at no cost to Title III. 10/29: ELL Raising: Strategies to Help ELLs reach their full potential November: December: January: February: March: April: May: June: 4. ENL teachers will also attend workshops held by the Borough Field Support Center regarding ELL instruction and compliance. Meetings are conducted by Lucia Perez Medina and Christine Etienne. Topics and dates are yet to be determined. September: CR Part 154 October: ELL Data Analysis Tool November: TBD December: TBD January: TBD February: TBD March: TBD April: TBD May: TBD June: TBD 5. Classroom and ENL teachers are attending professional development contracted by the school at no cost to Title III throughout the school year. PD topics cover literacy, success criteria, helping students to become assessment capable learners, helping ELLs to succeed during Reader's and Writer's Workshop and the common core standards. PD will be provided by Paul Bloomberg (The Core Collaborative) and Carl Anderson (Literacy Support Systems) at no cost to Title III. Dates are yet to be determined. 11/8: Amplfying the Writer's Workshop (Carl Anderson & Literacy Support Systems) 11/9: Helping students become assessment capable learners (Paul Bloomberg & The Core Collaborative) 12/9: Carl Anderson & Literacy Support Systems 3/8: Carl Anderson & Literacy Support Systems 3/23: Paul Bloomberg & The Core Collaborative 5/10: Paul Bloomberg & The Core Collaborative 6. ENL Teachers will attend professional development workshops provided by outside providers when they are available. 1  Part C: Professional Development Tentative dates are listed below. Additional workshops and dates are to be determined. 10/21: Bridging Between Two Worlds: 2016 English Language Learner Parent Academy, provided by New York University 11/18-11/19: Bank Street Language Series: Building on students linguistic and cultural assets for academic success 6. ENL Teachers (Title III teachers - Alison DuBois-Eker, Dina Napolitano, and Loredana Torelli) , Administration (Erin O'Hanlon, Diana Olsen) and literacy coaches (Terri Fazzolari and Mary Toner) will also conduct in-house professional development for classroom teachers on working with ELLs in the mainstream classroom at no cost to Title III. This professional development will be ongoing throughout the school year. Information will be provided at select instructional team meetings, faculty conferences, inquiry meetings, admin and planning meetings, and one-on-one with teachers on an as needed basis. Topics and dates are yet to be determined. Agendas and attendance will be kept on file for all professional development attended and conducted. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: PS 247’s parent coordinator, Melissa Sheredos, will hold English classes for parents. Ms. Sheredos has attended trainings on administering a language class for parents, as well as training from the Translation and Interpretation Unit on working with ELL parents. These classes are held weekly throughout the school year on Tuesday mornings from 9:00 until 10:00, running from October through June (totaling 30 class sessions), and parents of all ELLs are invited to attend. Parents are notified with translated flyers, face-to-face at parent orientations, parent-teacher conferences, parent meetings, during other teacher-parent contact, by word of mouth, by email list-serve, and when parents express interest in wanting to learn English. Translation services for parents will be provided as needed. Each service is provided at no cost to Title III. PS 247 also holds monthly parent and child workshops conducted on Saturdays, running from 9:30 am until 100:00 pm. These workshops are also run by Ms. Sheredos, and are open to all families. Workshop topics are still yet to be determined. Additionally, parents will be invited to attend select after school sessions. They will be notified of after school sessions through a translated invitation sent home with students. During these sessions, parents review and discuss with their children work done during the previous or current 2 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities unit of study, and have an opportunity to work collaboratively with their children on new projects (e.g. researching the internet on the iPad or reading informational texts together). Parent involvement during these sessions will be at no cost to Title III. Invitations to all workshops and events will be sent home in the home language of the family. Attendance is recorded at each event, and these records, as well as agendas, are kept on file at the school. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 3  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 20 School Name NYC College Partnership School Borough Brooklyn School Number 247 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Christopher E. Ogno Coach Mary Toner ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Alison DuBois-Eker Teacher/Subject Area E. Sauchelli ENL L.Torelli ENL Teacher/Subject Area L. Quinn, Classroom T. & ENL Related-Service Provider Maureen Morisano, Resource Superintendent Karina Costantino Assistant Principal Erin O'Hanlon Coach Stephanie Spatola School Counselor Sue Z. Meyerson Parent Li Liyun Parent Coordinator Melissa Sheredos Field Support Center Staff Member Aaron Perez Other (Name and Title) Catherine Dean Reading/Testing C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 3 0 2 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 6 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 4  D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 863 Total number of ELLs 241 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 27.93% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 4 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? PS 247 uses the Teacher’s College Reading and Writing Project (TCRWP [lower grade]) and the DRA and/or running records, as well as the Rigby ELL Assessment Kit (upper grade) to assess students in grades K-5 in reading and literacy growth. These assessments are done twice a year along with informal ongoing assessments such as IRAs (informal reading assessments) teacher observations, running records, conference notes, and unit assessments. All students, including ELLs , are assessed using the same tools. The results from these assessments are used to drive instruction. From this data, teachers are able to derive instructional foci, determine which reading strategies each child needs to work on, determine their independent and guided reading levels, and plan literacy lessons. Also, teachers are able to effectively differentiate instruction for each student. 5  Kindergarten: As of November 2015, according to the IRA (Independent Reading Assessment) administered to all kindergraten students, 83% of kindergarten ELLs are reading below grade level, 15% are approaching grade standard, and 2% are reading on grade level for this time in the school year. Of the students who are reading below grade level, 37% are at the entering level, 19% are at the emerging level, 16% are transitioning, and 28% are at the expanding level. Of the ELLs who are approaching grade standard, 12.5% are at the emerging level, 50% are at the transitioning level, , and the remaining 37.5% are at the expanding level. The student who is reading on grade level is at the transitioning level. In order to support ELLs in the classroom, teachers have a variety of strategies in place to support literacy development. Kindergarten teachers use a variety of methods of instruction to meet the needs of all students. Some methods are shared reading, read aloud, literacy centers, guided reading, and word study. During shared reading, teachers use large picture books with predictable patterns. Shared reading helps students to learn reading strategies and language skills. Students use the strategies they learned in shared reading independently to become better readers. During read aloud, teachers model and act out what a proficient reader does, and how they think while reading. In guided reading, teachers meet with students to help them use the strategies and skills they have learned through watching, listening, and participating in read alouds and shared reading. Typical reading strategies for students in Kindergarten are letter/sound recognition, vocabulary and sight word work. Students on grade level may begin to work on matching spoken words to print, moving from left to right as they read, using the illustrations to help us to understand, and locating known words in a text. Grade 1: As of November 2015, according to the IRA (Independent Reading Assessment) administered to all 1st grade students, 30% of 1st grade ELLs are reading below grade level, 30% are approaching grade standard, 30 % are reading on grade level for this time in the school year, and 10% are reading above grade level. Of the students who are reading below grade level, 37% are at the entering level, 21% are at the emerging level, 10.5% are transitioning, and 31.5% are at the expanding level. Of the ELLs who are approaching grade standard, 16% are at the entering level, 5% are at the emerging level, 21% are at the transitioning level, , and the remaining 58% are at the expanding level. Of the ELLs who are reading at grade level, 16% are emerging, 10% are transitioning, and 74% are expanding. Lastly, for students who are above grade standard, 17% are at the emerging level, 17% are transitioning, and 66% are expanding. In order to support ELLs in the classroom, teachers have a variety of strategies in place to support literacy development. 1st grade teachers use a variety of teaching methods and activities to support ELLs in literacy and language development. 1st grade students are engaged in small group learning all day, which allows the teacher to meet with students with common needs. Shared reading, read aloud, guided reading and word study lessons are planned to meet students’ needs. Typical reading strategies for students in 1st grade are vocabulary and sight word work, monitoring their reading to make sure what they’ve read makes sense, looking at parts of words, working on reading with fluency. Students on grade level may begin to work on visualizing, keeping track of events and details, and self-correcting. All teachers and students in all grades are also focusing on common core standards RL2 and RI2. Teachers across grades help students to find the author's message and main idea. Teachers use a variety of strategies to help students find the message, theme and main idea and succeed with RL2 and RI2 including success criteria & a success criteria continuum, theme boards, sets of books with similar messages, graphic organizers, etc. Technologies such as smart boards are used in the classroom to provide visual and interactive support in the content areas as well. Grade 2: As of November 2015, according to the IRA (Independent Reading Assessment) administered to all 2nd grade students, 37% of 2nd grade ELLs are reading below grade level, 37% are approaching grade standard, 26 % are reading on grade level for this time in the school year, and no students are reading above grade level. Of the students who are reading below grade level, 43% are at the entering level, 7% are at the emerging level, 29% are transitioning, and 21% are at the expanding level. Of the ELLs who are approaching grade standard, 29% are at the transitioning level, and the remaining 71% are at the expanding level. Of the ELLs who are reading at grade level, 100% are expanding. 2nd grade teachers use a variety of teaching methods and activities to support ELLs in literacy and language development. Small groups are formed, and students are engaged in shared reading, read aloud, guided reading, and word study daily. Typical reading strategies for students in 2nd grade are using parts from known words to read unknown words, going back to re-read and/or skipping a section and coming back to it, self-monitoring, and reading with fluency. Students on grade level may begin to work on visualizing, keeping track of events and details, retelling, and self-correcting. All teachers and students in all grades are also focusing on common core standards RL2 and RI2. Teachers across grades help students to find the author's message or theme of the text, and main idea. Teachers use a variety of strategies to help students find the message, theme and main idea and 6  succeed with RL2 and RI2 including success criteria & a success criteria continuum for self assessment, theme boards, sets of books with similar messages, graphic organizers, etc. Teachers use a variety of methods and strategies to support ELLs in the classroom. The Language Leaders program is one example of a program in the classroom that provides beginner ELLs with extra support such as a partner to study early phonics skills with and to provide native language support. Grade 3: As of November 2015, according to the IRA (Independent Reading Assessment) administered to all 3rd grade students, 90% of 3rd grade ELLs are reading below grade level, 10% are approaching grade standard. Of the students who are reading below grade level, 28% are at the entering level, 5.5% are at the emerging level, 5.5% are transitioning, and 61% are at the expanding level. Of the ELLs who are approaching grade standard, 100% are at the expanding level. In order to support ELLs in the classroom, teachers have a variety of strategies in place to support literacy development. Teachers conduct mini-lessons during the readers’ workshop that focus on grade level reading and writing strategies. Additionally, they conduct shared reading, read alouds, small guided reading groups, and individual conferences in order to meet the needs of all students. Common strategies that ELLs in 3rd grade are currently working on are retelling, tracking characters, identifying the problem and solution in a text, and following events that lead to the problem or solution in the story. For individualized instruction, strategies and foci vary depending on the needs and proficiency levels of students. For entering & emerging or newcomer ELLs, some common strategies that students and their teachers are working on are sound recognition and using the pictures to help them understand the text, looking at words as we read, using words we know to figure out unknown words, using picture clues, and partner reading. For transitioning students, the instructional focus is on retelling, summarizing with a focus on story elements, and tracking characters in order to work towards understanding the problem & solution, as well as lesson learned, message, and theme. For expanding students, the instructional focus is on making connections, retelling, using chapter grids, questioning, and recognizing and holding onto important details that support the message or theme. As students’ proficiency level increases, so does their reading level, and the complexity of strategies used. Additionally, all teachers and students in all grades are also focusing on common core standards RL2 and RI2. Teachers across grades help students to find the author's message or theme of the text with details to support it, and main idea and supporting details. Our first school-wide inquiry this year focused on supporting students in RL2 using success criteria. Teachers use a variety of strategies to help students find the message, theme and main idea and succeed with RL2 and RI2 including success criteria & a success criteria continuum for self assessment, theme boards, sets of books with similar messages, graphic organizers, etc. Grade 4: As of November 2015, according to the IRA (Independent Reading Assessment) administered to all 4th grade students, 81% of 4th grade ELLs are reading below grade level, 19% are approaching grade standard. Of the students who are reading below grade level, 23% are at the entering level, 23% are at the emerging level, 31% are transitioning, and 23% are at the expanding level. Of the ELLs who are approaching grade standard, 100% are at the expanding level. In order to support ELLs in the classroom, teachers have a variety of strategies in place to support literacy development. Teachers conduct mini-lessons during the readers’ workshop that focus on grade level reading and writing strategies. Additionally, they conduct shared reading, read alouds, small guided reading groups, and individual conferences in order to meet the needs of all students. Common strategies that ELLs in 4th grade are currently working on are tracking character traits, identifying the problem and solution in a text, finding the lesson that the character learns, and finding details that support the story’s message or theme. For individualized instruction, strategies and foci vary depending on the needs and proficiency levels of students. For entering & emerging or newcomer ELLs, some common strategies that students and their teachers are working on are recognizing important details, vocabulary development, story elements, using pictures clues, sequencing, using words we know to figure out unknown words, using picture clues, and partner reading. For transitioning students, the instructional focus is on retelling, summarizing with a focus on story elements, and tracking characters in order to work towards understanding the problem & solution, as well as lesson learned, message, and theme. For expanding students, the instructional focus is on making connections, retelling, using chapter grids, questioning, and recognizing and holding onto important details that support the message or theme. As students’ proficiency level increases, so does their reading level, and the complexity of strategies used. Additionally, all teachers and students in all grades are also focusing on common core standards RL2 and RI2. Teachers across grades help students to find the author's message or theme of the text with details to support it, and main idea and supporting details. Our first school-wide inquiry this year focused on supporting students in RL2 using success criteria. Teachers use a variety of strategies to help students find the message, theme and main idea and succeed with RL2 and RI2 including success criteria & a success criteria continuum for self assessment, theme boards, sets of 7  books with similar messages, graphic organizers, etc. Grade 5: As of November 2015, according to the IRA (Independent Reading Assessment) administered to all 5th grade students, 100% of 5th grade ELLs are reading below grade level. Of the students who are reading below grade level, 20% are at the entering level, 20% are at the emerging level, 13% are transitioning, and 47% are at the expanding level. 33% of these students receive special education services. In order to support ELLs in the classroom, teachers have a variety of strategies in place to support literacy development. Teachers conduct mini-lessons during the readers’ workshop that focus on grade level reading and writing strategies. Additionally, they conduct shared reading, read alouds, small guided reading groups, and individual conferences in order to meet the needs of all students. Common strategies that ELLs in 5th grade are currently working on are looking at character change, finding details that support the theme or message of a text, following the problem or solution in a story, and identifying the message or theme. For individualized instruction, strategies and foci vary depending on the needs and proficiency levels of students. For entering & emerging or newcomer ELLs, some common strategies that students and their teachers are working on are recognizing important details, vocabulary development, story elements, using pictures clues, sequencing, using words we know to figure out unknown words, using picture clues, and partner reading. For transitioning students, the instructional focus is on retelling, summarizing with a focus on story elements, and tracking characters in order to work towards understanding the problem & solution, as well as lesson learned, message, and theme. For expanding students, the instructional focus is on making connections, retelling, using chapter grids, questioning, and recognizing and holding onto important details that support the message or theme. As students’ proficiency level increases, so does their reading level, and the complexity of strategies used. Additionally, all teachers and students in all grades are also focusing on common core standards RL2 and RI2. Teachers across grades help students to find the author's message or theme of the text with details to support it, and main idea and supporting details. Our first school-wide inquiry this year focused on supporting students in RL2 using success criteria. Teachers use a variety of strategies to help students find the message, theme and main idea and succeed with RL2 and RI2 including success criteria & a success criteria continuum for self assessment, theme boards, sets of books with similar messages, graphic organizers, etc. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? In order to assess the success of our programs, we employ many different assessment tools. ENL teachers assess ELLs throughout the year. ENL teachers set group goals that are common core standards based and appropriate for the groups’ proficiency levels in reading, writing, listening, and speaking, as well as individual goals for each student based on writing evaluations, reading conferences, oral language assessments, and observations. Teachers also help students reach goals set in their classrooms through our integrated programming. ENL teachers work closely with classroom teachers in order to best support ELLs in their content studies. In order to assess whether students have met their goals, teachers look at student work, score writing pieces on a holistic rubric, evaluate oral language based on a holistic rubric, and refer to a reading strategy checklist. All rubrics and checklists come from the Rigby On Our Way to English program. Instructional decisions are made based on goals set for each group, individual goals, and student performance on various assessments and general student work. ENL teachers also articulate frequently with classroom teachers about the progress and performance of ELLs in the mainstream classroom and content areas. Teachers share information, assessment data, conference notes, student work, and observations about students in order to best assess their needs and plan future instruction to meet the needs of ELLs. Based on the NYSESLAT we are also able to evaluate the success of our ENL program. A useful tool for us is the EDAT. We analyze students’ test scores by looking at their performance on Listening & Speaking and Reading & Writing. We compare students’ scores with how they performed the year before, and determine whether or not they have made growth and improvements from year to year. Many of them reach proficiency in English in 3 years. Many students who do not move up in 8  proficiency level over the course of 2 years are generally students who have been classified as students with special needs. Also, we look at the ways in which students are performing well, and in what areas they need extra support. The trend is that students generally perform higher in listening & speaking than in reading & writing. Support in all 4 of the language modalities is important, but for this reason our program and instruction provides extra support for students in the areas of reading and writing, while still promoting oral language development. The ENL program integrates balanced literacy components such as shared reading, read aloud, guided reading and reading strategies, small group support, guided writing, the use of graphic organizers, etc. ENL teachers also conference with students during independent reading and morning conferences as well as about their writing both in the classroom during integrated instruction and during the stand alone ENL periods. Based on the 2014 and 2015 NYSESLAT scores we can conclude that the ENL program is successful in helping students to move up in proficiency level from year to year. Data drives instruction. Based on this analysis of the 2014 and 2015 NYSESLAT scores, and therefore the ENL program, we can make various instructional decisions. One conclusion that we can make is that students benefit in all proficiency areas from the curriculum that blends language development, literacy, and the content areas. In every grade, ENL teachers will continue to support students in balanced literacy activities, such as shared reading, read aloud, guided reading, close reading, reading conferences, shared writing, guided writing, independent writing, and will place emphasis on reading comprehension activities and reading for understanding. ENL teachers and classroom teachers also use the strategies and techniques in the success criteria RL2 continuum to help build assessment capable learners. Teachers will also continue to prepare students for the NYSESLAT exam with explicit test preparation and skills such as going back to the passage, answering various kinds of questions, and adding details to writing during the month prior to the exam. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] PS 247 uses data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention framework. Classroom teachers use various assessments to collect data on student performance in literacy and math. Teachers utilize the TCRWP, DRA, running records, teacher created assessments, observations, and reading and writing conferences to assess students' literacy skills and progress. Based on the results of these assessments, students are provided with various literacy academic intervention services, such as individual and small group work with the teacher within the classroom, and small group push in and pull out literacy services provided by our academic intervention specialists in reading. We also offer extended day services for students in small groups as well for children who are struggling with making progress in literacy. Teachers also use various classroom math assessments in order to assess children's math skills, primarily the math assessments used in our Go Math program, teacher created math skills assessments, and math problem solving exemplars. Based on the results of these assessments, children in need of supplemental services to improve their math skills are provided with academic intervention services provided by our AIS specialists during the school day, as well as extended day services that offer small group math instruction by their classroom teacher. Students may also work individually with the teacher or in small groups with similar needs during the regular school day with the teacher. Additionally, newcomer and beginner English Language Learners, as well as all ELLs who are literate in their first language, are offered native language support to assist them in math and science. We provide children with the bilingual glossaries offered by the DOE and bilingual dictionaries in order to provide them with terminology in their native language in the content areas. Lastly, children who score proficient on the NYSESLAT and are now commanding ELLs are provided with small group literacy AIS support as well as they transition to a general education classroom with the support of the ENL teacher for 2 periods a week for a two year period after scoring commanding on the NYSESLAT. 9  6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. An analysis of the Spring 2015 NYSESLAT shows that in Grade K, 4 (6%) scored entering, 9 (14%) scored emerging, 9 (14 %) scored transitioning, 33 (52%) scored expanding, and 8 (13%) scored commanding. In grade 1, 3 (6%) scored entering, 2 (4%) scored emerging, 5 (10%) scored transitioning, 22 (45%) scored expanding, and 17 (35%) scored commanding. In grade 2, 1 (4%) scored entering, 1 (4%) scored emerging, 2 (8%) scored transitioning, 19 (76%) scored expanding, and 2 (8%) scored commanding. In grade 3, 1 (5.5%) scored entering, 1 (5.5%) scored emerging, 4 (22%) scored transitioning, 8 (45%) scored expanding, and 4 (22%) scored commanding. In grade 4, 0 (0%) scored entering, 3 (18.75%) scored emerging, 2 (12.5%) scored transitioning, 6 (37.5%) scored expanding, and 5 (31.25%) scored commanding. In grade 5, 4 (29%) scored entering, 5 (36%) scored emerging, 0 (0%) scored transitioning, 2 (14%) scored expanding, and 3 (21%) scored commanding. The vast majority of entering & emerging ELLs are classified as newcomers (94%), the remaining 2 students at the emerging level who are developing ELLs are both students with disabilities. Additionally, many of the children (80%) who are developing ELLs are children in Special Education. According to the NYSITELL scores for 2015-2016, in kindergarten, 18 (21%) scored entering, 10 (12%) scored emerging, 10 (12%) scored transitioning, 16 (19%) scored expanding, and 32 (37%) scored commanding. In grades 1-5, 13 (93%) of newcomers scored entering on the NYSITELL, while 1 student (7%) scored emerging. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. At PS 247, students are grouped in classes on their grade level homogeneously. Each class on the grade, K-5, has both ELLs and non-ELLs in the class. Additionally, among the ELLs in a classroom, students are grouped homogeneously by level, with children at varying levels (entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding, and commanding) within each classroom. Grade K has one self-contained ENL classroom (due to high numbers of ELLs in the lower grades, particularly kindergarten) which is serviced by Taryn Havey, a dually certified ENL and Common Branch teacher. Additionally, in grade 4 there is 1 teacher, Lauren Quinn, who is dually licensed in ENL and Common Branch 0  who has a homogeneous 4th grade class with both ELLs and Non-ELLs. Ms. Quinn provides integrated ENL service for the ELLs in her class. There are 5 additional ENL teachers who provide integrated and standalone ENL services in grades K-5. Loredana Torelli services grades K and 2 for integrated and standalone ENL. Dina Napolitano services grade 1for integrated and standalone ENL. Erin Sauchelli services grade 2 for integrated and standalone ENL. Alison DuBois-Eker services grades 3, & 4 for integrated ENL and grades 3, 4, and 5 for standalone ENL. Kate Culleton services grade 5 for integrated ENL. Integrated ENL instruction: Integrated ENL instruction helps students build English language skills through content area instruction. Integrated ENL instruction includes content area subject matter and English language development using ENL strategies. ENL programs provide instruction in English with home language support, emphasizing English language acquisition. The fully certified ENL teachers push-in to the classrooms in grades K-5 during the literacy block and other content area instructional periods (mathematics, social studies, reader's and writer's workshop) to provide integrated service for entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding, and commanding students. ENL teachers provide integrated instruction to commanding ELLs two 45 minute periods per week, and to expanding, transitioning, entering and emerging students four 45 minute periods per week. ENL teachers work closely with classroom teachers to plan and implement integrated ENL instruction that is fully aligned with classroom instruction, that works within a literacy and standards based curriculum, and that best support ELLs at all proficiency levels in their classroom studies. ENL teachers work with small groups of ELLs at varying levels in phonics, guided reading, close reading, read aloud, and writing, as well as integrating content area topics and studies. Classroom teachers and ENL teachers collaboratively plan , and implement appropriate materials, differentiation, modifications, strategies and and skills in order to help all ELLs succeed in the classroom. Standalone ENL instruction: Standalone ENL instruction helps students to develop English language skills so that students can succeed in core content courses. It is delivered by a fully certified ENL teacher. ENL programs provide instruction in English with home language support, emphasizing English language acquisition. The fully certified ENL teachers pull-out groups of entering, emerging, and transitioning students in order to provide them with tailored small group instruction in a standalone ENL setting for four 45 minute periods per week. Groups are kept small in order to best be able to meet the needs of entering, emerging and transitioning ELLs. Students are grouped by grade and by level. Lessons are literacy and standards based, and focus on language development within the context of phonics, guided reading, close reading, read aloud, and writing, as well as integrating content area topics and studies. b. TBE program. If applicable. PS 247 does not currently have a TBE program. c. DL program. If applicable. PS 247 does not currently have a Dual Language program. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Commanding students receive at least two 45 minute periods per week of small group instruction. Expanding students receive four 45 minute periods of integrated ENL per week. Transitioning, emerging, and entering students receive four periods of integrated ENL per week, as well as 4 periods of standalone ENL per week. Integrated ENL instruction is delivered during Literacy Centers and Reader’s Workshop & Writer’s Workshop. The ENL teacher blends literacy skills, language development and content area instruction in both integrated and standalone ENL in order to support ELLs in their classroom studies as well 1  as develop their language skills. Instruction and activities are appropriate to the stages of language acquisition of the students. a. ENL Minutes: PS 247 has expanded their ENL staff in order to meet the mandates of the new CR Part 154. ENL teachers generally service one or two grades. ENL teachers push into classes during reader's and writer's workshop for expanding and commanding students. ELA Minutes: ELLs receive ELA instruction in their classroom during reader's and writer's workshop, read-aloud and word-study periods, shared reading, independent reading, and reading conferences, as well as guided reading instruction. ENL teachers push in during the literacy period in order to support them in their ELA studies. During standalone ENL, teachers blend literacy, language and content areas through balanced literacy practices such as phonics, guided reading, shared reading, read aloud, close reading and writing practices. NLA Minutes: Our school has a bilingual lending library from which students borrow bilingual books. They read these texts during independent reading time, can take these books home to read independently or with their family, and ENL teachers use these bilingual (native language/English) texts for instruction if appropriate and applicable to the class studies. Additionally, ELL students, particularly newcomers, are encouraged to write in the native language when appropriate. Also, students discuss texts together, partner share, and assist each other in the native language. Teachers incorporate native language vocabulary into instruction and lessons when appropriate. Students who are literate in their native language are given bilingual dictionaries and glossaries to help make content comprehensible. Students use these dictionaries and glossaries during class time, at home for use with homework, during ENL, during content area instruction, during class administered tests and assessments, during test preparation, and during state and city assessments. We have other bilingual materials available, such as flashcards, books, and games. Also, students make use of technological bilingual materials, such as an online world library, online translators, and their personal translation technology. Lastly, we have implemented a new program called the Language Leaders wherein newcomer ELLs are partnered with a student who shares their language in their mainstream classroom for academic support. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL program blends content area learning, language development, and balanced literacy while employing ENL strategies. ENL instruction is directly informed by the grade’s curriculum, and by the common core standards. Literature is at the center of language development exposing students to texts featuring academic language. Reading books, discussing texts, writing and using various vocabulary introduces students to academic language. ENL teachers ensure that their language and literacy instruction in ENL are directly aligned and speak to the common core literacy standards for informational and narrative text, the oral language standards, and foundational skills standards appropriate for the grade and language level of students. ENL teachers differentiate instruction according to the five stages of language acquisition and develop appropriate instructional activities to best support the ELLs and provide comprehensible input. ENL teachers integrate science, social studies, and math into the curriculum to provide ELLs with needed scaffolding for success in the mainstream classroom. The language support strategies used for content area language learning are scaffolding, such as graphic organizers, modeling, extended time, hands on activities, song, vocabulary development activities, flash cards, and creating comprehensible input using visuals and gestures. The materials used in the ENL program are Rigby On Our Way to English ENL series, Rigby leveled guided reading books, some Into English materials, and Singlish. We also use a variety of National Geographic Materials such as the Reach program and Ladders and National Geographic Young Explorer. For oral language we use the Mondo "Let's Talk About It!" materials. We have an ENL classroom library, bilingual books, multicultural literature, big books, patterned books, picture dictionaries, magazines and other authentic texts. We also ensure that the program uses “high complexity texts” and text excerpts in read aloud and shared reading as directed by the Common 2  Core State Standards. Many visuals are used to support and foster language learning, such as photographs, drawings, picture libraries, and video clips from Discovery Streaming. We also use manipulatives, song, rhythm, and poems. Realia is incorporated into lessons when possible. Techniques and methods such as Total Physical Response, learning centers, and hands-on activities make learning accessible, meaningful, and memorable for students. We use many technological resources such as Reading A-Z, RAZ Kids, Vocabulary A-Z, Brainpop.com, Weekly Reader Connect, Imagine Learning, Starfall.com, and other websites & videos that connect to content, listening centers, and interactive activties on the Smart Board. The content area materials are as follows: We use Rigby’s On Our Way to English program, which has big books, guided reading materials and leveled books, charts, chants, posters, and activities across many different themes. Some other packages purchased have been Lakeshore Resource boxes on topics such as the United States, Native Americans, and Landforms and Mapping. Another Lakeshore content area material we utilize are Theme Boxes, or pre-packaged containers with various content related materials such as Cultures of the World and Animals. We have purchased New Bridge and Sundance Theme sets on content area topics such as United States Symbols and Life Cycles. Time for Kids, Weekly Reader, and National Geographic Explorer are some examples of magazines and authentic materials used to teach the content areas. We also use National Geographic books, and various atlases, maps, and globes. We have an extensive non-fiction library that spans grade levels, reading levels, and content areas. The ENL program uses a multicultural library on topics such as countries around the world and realistic fiction stories about cultural celebrations and traditions. We have content area posters as well as photo libraries purchased from Lakeshore and Mondo and collected by teachers from various sources. We also use various other big books, and hands on science materials. We have math manipulatives on hand for various activities that span the content areas as well. Finally, students are also equipped with content area dictionaries that help to make instruction comprehensible. Teachers provide comprehensible input by using academic strategies and ENL methods such as activating and building background knowledge, graphic organizers, group work, illustrated vocabulary charts, photographs, bilingual libraries, use of video and other visual supports, gestures, vocabulary development activities, manipulatives, leveled books, multicultural books, bilingual and native language connections, and technological resources. Modifications to the classroom curriculum are also made to meet the needs of ELLs. Depending on their language level, teachers have developed alternative projects and activities that are relevant to the grade's curriculum, but adjusted to best meet the language needs of the students. Also, classroom teachers have received professional development on and make use of the ENL strategies and methods above to make content comprehensible to ELLs. Though the Common Core State Standards are rigorous for ELLs, our focus on literacy instruction for ELLs through read aloud, guided reading, and shared reading, and a concentrated effort to build higher order and critical thinking skills, coupled with the careful, considerate creation of comprehensible input, the use of rich materials, and the incorporation of the scaffolds and support listed above, our instruction will help all ELLs to work towards or reach the expectations of the Common Core State Standards. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Evaluation of students in their home languages takes place in many different, informal ways. Teachers interview students and their parents with the help of a translator in order to determine whether or not the child is literate in their native language. New students who are literate in their native language are encouraged to use their native language during certain activities in listening, speaking, reading and writing. Teachers utilize school staff when available in order to interpret and/or translate the student's work. Teachers also conference with bilingual students after reading a bilingual book. The teacher can evaluate the student's comprehension of the story and their use of strategies in the native language through conferencing, questioning, and accountable talk. A child's literacy level in their native language is always taken into account when working with English Language Learners, as their literacy level in the L1 directly influences their ability to read in the target language. Bilingual materials and these assessment techniques are available to students and conducted throughout the school year. PS 247 is also working on developing native language literacy screeners in order to quickly and efficiently assess the native language literacy levels of our students. 3  5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Instruction is differentiated for ELLs by grouping students by their grade, language proficiency levels and number of years the student has been receiving ENL services. Instruction is further differentiated by “ELL subgroup”. Different methods, materials, and activities are used with newcomer ELLs, developing ELLs, long term ELLs, students with interrupted formal education, and former ELLs. See explanations below. a. There are currently no SIFE students in our school, but if we were to receive a SIFE student, ENL teachers would first review the HLIS and interview the student to determine the home language and the amount of schooling the student has received. If the HLIS indicates that there is an interruption in the child's schooling, the teacher would administer the SIFE questionnaire, and if necessary, after communicating with the classroom teacher, the LENS assessment. ENL teachers would communicate with the classroom teacher regarding the child’s performance in reading, writing and content areas. Students who receive two years less instruction than their peers, are functioning two years below grade level, and may or may not be pre-literate in their native language are given the ENL services they are entitled to. Also the intervention team would determine additional services (resource room, reading support, AIS math, etc.) they may require. The classroom teacher would be informed of academic strategies, accommodations and modifications that can be made in the classroom to help the student, such as whole group discussion, partner talk, use of video and other visuals to support content area learning, illustrated vocabulary charts, group work and graphic organizers. Materials used are photographs, bilingual libraries, manipulatives, leveled books, and technological resources such as Imagine Learning, Brainpop.com and Smartboards. If we were to have a SIFE student in the building, they would be invited to the Title III after school program. The program is now open to newcomer, beginner and struggling ELLs. SIFE students would participate in the Title III program with other newcomer students. The Title III program supports ELLs in language development, literacy skills, and the content areas. b. The plan for newcomer ELLs in our school is that they receive additional attention and support during and outside of scheduled ENL periods as well as in their classroom by using low-level, multicultural reading books, manipulatives, Singlish, language games, flashcards, photo libraries, hands on activities, Imagine learning and Brainpop.com. Newcomers are supported in their mainstream classroom by providing each grade with a modified curriculum map containing modifications for newcomers that support language development, such as picture books as their published pieces, increased usage of picture books as read alouds, realia, alphabet work, sentence starters, and graphic organizers. We started a successful new program in recent years for newcomers called “Language Leaders”. This program pairs newcomer ELLs with both “peer tutors” and “bilingual buddies” in their classroom who provide these newcomers with additional language, academic and social support. Newcomers may receive small group support in English that extends beyond their mandated periods if a licensed ESL teacher is available to give them additional support. Newcomers may also meet with a reading specialist for tailored small group instruction. We also offer invitations to the Title III after school program to newly arrived students. Considering the fact that NCLB now requires ELA testing for ELLs after one year, various programs are in place to prepare newcomer students to take the state exam. Newcomer ELLs may receive AIS and other intervention services in order to improve their reading skills. Emphasis is placed on literacy development in the ENL classroom during intergrated and standalone service, as well as the mainstream class through balanced literacy. ENL and classroom teachers use strategies and instruction for language building support such as grammar-based lessons and activities, vocabulary building exercises, fluency building work and scaffolding strategies such as graphic organizers. We have developed a curriculum that supports ELLs in academic areas and question types that will help to prepare them to take the NYSESLAT and ELA exams. All ELLs participate in ELA preparation in their mainstream classroom as well. ELLs are familiarized with the test format as well as the expectations of the exam and passage types. This work prepares newcomer ELLs to take the state ELA exam after one year. c. Developing ELLs receive ENL services during the Readers’s and Writer’s workshops. Many of our developing ELLs are at 4  the expanding level, and receive integrated ENL service. Small groups ensure individual attention and support with ENL teachers focusing on reading, writing, academic language and linguistic development as well as cross-curricular instruction and support. Struggling ELLs may receive additional services such as AIS in reading and math. ENL and classroom teachers articulate regularly exchanging ideas for language building support such as grammar-based lessons and activities, vocabulary building exercises, fluency building work and scaffolding strategies such as graphic organizers. Materials used include leveled books, realia, content area resources such as maps and hands-on science activities, project based learning, photo libraries, technological resources such as video, Smartboards, websites such as Brainpop.com and Discovery Streaming, and using the internet for research. d. We currently do not have long term ELLs who have completed 6 years of service. If we had these students, they would be referred to the instructional team for review in order for them to receive services and support, such as, guided reading, extended day AIS, reading and math after school programs, Saturday Academy, Wilson Reading, linguistic support such as academic vocabulary building. Materials used would be leveled books, realia, content area resources such as maps and hands on science activities, project based learning, photo libraries such as video, Smartboards, websites such as Brainpop.com and Discovery Streaming, and usage of the internet as a resource for learning and research. e. For ELLs reaching commanding on the NYSESLAT we provide continuing transitional support for 2 years as per the new CR Part 154 regulations . As per NYS law, all commanding ELLs receive testing accommodations (extended time, separate location, a 3rd reading of listening passages, and bilingual dictionaries and glossaries, and native language exams) for 2 years after scoring commanding on the NYSESLAT exam. Additionally, commanding ELLs are provided with both 2 periods per week of integrated ENL support from a licensed ENL teacher, as well as small group AIS support in various content areas such as reading, writing, math, and science if necessary. Students receive this AIS extra support during various designated times during the day. The intervention team monitors how these students are progressing and whether the intervention services are appropriate for them. The inquiry team works with groups of struggling students on using and reading non-fiction texts, some of which are proficient ELLs. All teachers as well as support service providers are made aware of who the commanding ELLs are in their classrooms and groups. Classroom teachers also receive support in working with commanding ELLs, are informed of academic strategies and modifications that can be used and made in the classroom with commanding ELLs and continue to use ENL methodologies and strategies in their instruction. Some of these methods are continued use of visual support, project based learning, and technological resources. This allows them sufficient time to transition to the mainstream classroom without ENL services and testing modifications. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELL-SWDs are provided with access to academic content areas and language development through a variety of instructional strategies and materials. The needs of these students are accommodated by including smaller group size, the presence of a paraprofessional during ENL periods, specialized modifications and scaffolding materials like graphic organizers, partner work, technological resources, project-based learning and visual support. Materials used are photo libraries for visuals, hands on materials, games for learning, leveled books, maps, globes, and other social studies hands on and visual resources, science related materials such as hands-on experiments, realia, etc., technological resources such as Smart boards, websites like braipop.com and using the internet for learning and research. These instructional strategies and materials provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development. ENL and classroom teachers collaborate with Special Education teachers to address students’ special needs according to their IEPs. Teacher implement these strategies during both integrated and standalone instruction. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELL-SWDs are placed in less restrictive environments such as a General Education Class with SETTSS and Related Services, or a Collaborative Team Teaching Classroom (ICT OR CTT) at PS 247. We use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility in 5  order to meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWDs. Our school is using creative and flexible scheduling in order to provide all students with the least restrictive environment for learning. Students in CTT classes this year are also receiving small group pull out SETTSS for individualized instruction. In this way, children are educated in the most integrated and inclusive programs while still meeting each child's special needs. Additionally, ENL, General Education, Special Education, and related services (Speech, Occupational Therapy, Physical Therapy, Guidance Counseling, etc.) teachers work together in order to devise a schedule that is free of time conflicts and allows the child to receive all of the services that they are entitled to as per their IEPs. ENL Teachers work closely with classroom and special education teachers in order to best meet the grade level curricular expectations and standards for students for both integrated and standalone instruction. All teachers have access to a child’s IEP (either in hard copy or through SESIS [all teachers have been trained in accessing student’s profiles and IEPs through SESIS]). Teachers are aware of children’s IEP goals, and work together towards helping students reach those goals. Teachers consult with each other on methods, strategies, and materials in order to help ELL-SWDs within all of their content areas. The special education liaison/SETTSS/IEP teachers, and CTT/ICT special education teachers have also provided resources, materials, and training to classroom and ENL teachers on modifications, practices, and techniques that they have found to effectively reach all of their special needs students, including ELLS-SWDs. Modifications are made with language level and learning capabilties in mind such as alternative assignments and grade and language level appropriate projects. Instructional strategies and materials are as follows: smaller group size, the presence of a bilingual paraprofessional, specialized modifications and scaffolding materials like graphic organizers, partner work, technological resources, project-based learning and visual support. Materials used are photo libraries for visuals, hands on materials, games for learning, leveled books, maps, globes, and other social studies hands on and visual resources, science related materials such as hands-on experiments, realia, etc., technological resources such as Smart boards, websites like braipop.com and Discovery Streaming and using the internet for learning and research. All materials are grade level curriculum appropriate. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Academic Intervention Services (AIS) The intervention team reviews struggling students, including ELLs, and identifies those that are at risk for not meeting grade standards. Specialists on the team (such as the ENL Teachers, Resource Room teacher and AIS providers) suggest methods and strategies for meeting the needs of struggling students in the classroom. These students receive Academic Intervention Services if necessary. AIS services are available in math, reading, and writing. ELLs in all subgroups are entitled to receive services, including newcomer ELLs, developing ELLs, long term ELLs, former ELLs, ELL-SWDs, and SIFE students. AIS teachers employ various instructional strategies to ensure that they meet the needs of students at all proficiency levels. AIS groups are kept small and use individualized instruction. In some cases, such as in Reading Recovery, instruction is one-to-one. Students receive this small group instruction during various times of the day and during the extended day period. All intervention services are offered in English, while the "Language Leaders" program is a bilingual support. Newcomer ELLs: In addition to the AIS services available to all students in need, specific interventions are also in place for newcomer ELLs. Beginner and newcomer ELLs participate in the "Language Leader" program wherein they are paired up with children in their class who help to support their linguistic, academic and social development. Lastly, the Title III after school program offered to newcomer, beginner, and struggling ELLs provides supplemental small group instruction focusing on language development, content area studies, and literacy skills. Developing ELLs: In addition to the AIS services available to all students in need, specific intervention strategies are also in place for developing ELLs. Our intervention team works with small groups of struggling students, some of which are developing ELLs. In the classroom, teachers use strategies with developing ELLs such as grammar based lessons and activities, vocabulary building exercises, fluency building work, and scaffolding such as graphic organizers. Materials and strategies used for these ELLs are leveled books, realia, content area resources such as maps and hands-on science activities, project based learning, photo libraries and technological resources such as video, smart boards, websites such as brainpop.com, and using the internet as a 6  resource for learning and research. Long-Term ELLs: PS 247 does not currently have long-term ELLs, but if we were to have these students in the program we would use the following interventions: They would receive guided reading, AIS, after school programs, Saturday Academy, Wilson Reading, and linguistic support such as academic vocabulary building. Materials used for these ELLs are leveled books, realia, content area resources such as maps, project based learning, photo libraries, and technological resources such as video, smart boards, websites, and using the internet for research. Former ELLs: Former ELLs receive 2 periods per week of integrated ENL services with an ENL teacher. Teachers see students in small groups and provide support in reading, writing, content areas and linguistic development. Former ELLs may also receive guided reading, AIS services, be invited to attend various after school programs and may attend Saturday academy. Materials used for these services are leveled books, realia, content area resources such as maps and hands on materials, project based learning, translated materials, and technological resources such as video, smart boards, document cameras, websites, and using the internet for research. ELLs in Special Education: Most of these students are in general education with related services or cooperative team teaching (CTT/ICT) classrooms. Interventions for ELLs identified as having special needs are as follows: Small group instruction, the presence of bilingual paraprofessionals during all class periods (including during integrated and standalone ENL), specialized modifications such as scaffolding materials like graphic organizers, partner work, technological resources, project based learning, and visual support. Materials used are photo libraries and other visual support, leveled books, hands-on materials, graphic organizers, games for learning, technological resources, etc. The resource room teacher utilizes the Wilson Reading program and includes some ELLs who have been identified as having special needs. ELLs in special education may also be invited to the Title III after school program and Saturday Academy. ENL and classroom teachers familiarize themselves with the student’s IEP and are therefore very aware of their needs. Classroom and ENL teachers consult with special education teachers in order to best be prepared to meet their needs. Students receive related services based on their IEPs such as speech, resource room, occupational therapy, etc. Students also receive appropriate testing modifications and alternate assessment if necessary. Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE): PS 247 does not currently have any ELLs who have been identified as SIFE. If we were to have SIFE students, we would use the following interventions strategies: AIS math, reading and science, resource room if necessary, Saturday Academy, Title III after school, and additional academic strategies, accommodations, and modifications that can be made in the classroom such as using graphic organizers, visual support, hands on activities, illustrated vocabulary charts, group and partner work, group discussion, bilingual libraries, technological resources, leveled books, etc. Description of reading and math intervention services: Academic Intervention Services are provided for those students (including ELLs) who received a 1 or 2 on the ELA and Math state tests from the previous year and/or a recommendation based on a teacher’s observation and classroom assessments. These services include but are not limited to: small group instruction based on the data from the DRAs, IRAs, ELA and Math predictives, math ITAs, math unit assessments, end of the year math assessments, conferences, and reading levels. Students are grouped within their classroom and meet with an AIS provider generally 3 times per week. AIS teachers work closely with the classroom teacher to determine the specific goals needed for each student. AIS providers have access to the results of student’s assessments and may change groups or goals based on current data. Common strategies found in reading include retelling, main idea, character feelings/traits, questioning, author’s purpose, and the big idea. These strategies are modeled through guided reading. Common strategies found in math include problem solving, addition, subtraction, multiplication and division of whole numbers, decimals and fractions, telling time, finding the perimeter and area of different shapes and measurement. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? 7  For the 2014-2015 and 2015-2016 school year and beyond, we have adapted our ENL curriculum to align to the new NYS Common Core Standards and the new CR Part 154 regulations. We are maintaining our curriculum which integrates language, literacy, and content areas, and are enhancing it with a stronger focus on literacy development, a greater presence of balanced literacy practices, particularly in the areas of read aloud, shared reading, and guided reading, and the integration of more rigorous higher-order and critical thinking development in both integrated and standalone ENL classes. ENL teachers will continue to closely consult with classroom teachers in order to be aware of student needs, and work towards helping ELLs to reach the high demands of the common core standards. Additionally, according to CR Part 154 mandates, teachers will now conduct both integrated and standalone ENL instruction. Teachers will provide integrated ENL instruction to ELLs in all grades, at all proficiency levels during the literacy block, and will provide standalone ENL instruction to ELLs at the entering, emerging, and transitioning levels during other times throughout the school day. During the 2014-2015 and 2015-2016 school year, we will have implemented a family literacy program. The program began in grades pre-k through 2, and may expand to the upper grades in coming years. An ENL teacher, along with the library & media studies teacher work together to plan dynamic family literacy nights. Outreach to parents is done through flyers, emails, and text message reminders. Flyers are available in translated versions for families of diverse language backgrounds. Family literacy nights are held during after school hours, and feature a variety of educational activities that parents and children can complete together. Bilingual books as well as English language books are available for families to take home in order to build their libraries. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Unfortunately, PS 247 has lost their extended day program which gave additional small group support to ELLs during the 2014-2015 year (and beyond), due to the new contact and the restructuring of the school day. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are included in all school programs. English language learners are invited to participate in school programs by sending invitation letters to students in English and the native language. Students are also encouraged to join programs by ENL and classroom teachers through personal conversations, as well as conversations with parents in English and/or the native language. ELLs are invited to participate in the NIA after school program, chorus, Saturday Academy, band, Language Leaders, Student Government, Enrichment, and Tech Squad. Invitations are sent home to programs like band, NIA, Saturday Academy, and Title III. Invitations are either translated, or are accompanied by a notice that states in many languages that this letter is important and should be translated. For programs such as enrichment, chorus, Language Leaders, and Tech Squad, students are selected by teachers, but if they fit the program’s criteria ELLs may be invited to participate, and many times are. When ELLs participate in special programs, modifications such as visuals, translation, hands on activities, bilingual materials, building and activating background knowledge, etc. are used to help them to fully participate in, enjoy, and get the most out of the program. The Title III program consists entirely of ELLs. Many ELLs participate in the band program, in the NIA program, Saturday Academy, and Language Leaders. In addition to special, extra curricular activities, ELLs are also provided access to and support from all AIS services in the building. The Title III after school/Saturday ELL program serves identified ELL students who are in the newcomer and beginner category, and those who are determined to be “at risk” of not meeting standards in grades 1-5. Approximately 45 students will be included in the after school program, and 45 students in the Saturday program. The after school program will be taught by 3 fully certified ESL teachers for 4 hours a week teaching small groups from November through early Spring. Each day will consist of two 2-hour sessions. The Saturday program will be taught by 3 fully certified ESL teachers. The Saturday program is a field trip component, with 4 full day Saturday field trips for 3 groups of ELL students. Each trip will be approximately 6 hours in duration. 3 fully certified ESL teachers will chaperone the trips, along with 1 supervisor. The total number of trip hours will be 24 hours per teacher/supervisor. The students will be taught the English language through thematic or genre based units spanning the content areas with a 8  focus on literacy development. Within the units there will be hands-on, content based, activities and literacy support. These instructional foci will benefit ELLs in all of their academic needs. The focus on newcomer, beginner, and those ELLs that are at risk of not meeting grade standards mirrors our school wide instructional focus. Our studies will encourage language development with lessons focusing on all 4 proficiency areas: listening, speaking, reading, and writing. The units of study are cross-curricular, covering a wide variety of subject areas and topics such as: Science in the study of animal habitats, environmental problems and solutions, planting and growing, and natural resources; and social studies in the study of the seven continents and where in the world we find certain animals/habitats, and ways in which students can take social action to help animals, people, and habitats in need. Literacy will be supported through the use of books, student writing in response to each of these topics, and project based learning. Field trips will be educational and supportive of and supplemental to thematic units studied in the after school program. Our school also offers an after school NIA program. The program is open to all students, including ELLs, and acceptance is based on a lottery system due to space restrictions. The NIA program is 5 days a week for 3 hours a day. It runs from September through June. The NIA program offers snack to the children, followed by the “Morning News” in which children share about their day and their lives. The groups are then broken up into activities, led by “activity specialists”. Each activity is accompanied by a read aloud related to the day’s exercise. The activities include gym, dance, music, journalism, gardening, and drama. For the last hour of the program, the “activity specialists” assist children with their homework. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We use many different materials both in the standalone and integrated ENL programs, and in mainstream classrooms to meet the needs of ELLs. ENL teachers primarily use high quality children's literature and informational texts in the ENL program. Teachers develop units of study around children's books, also incorporating magazines, articles, short stories, folktales, fables, videos, pictures, etc. Additionally, we use other materials to supplement our studies. Some of these supplemental materials are the Rigby On Our Way to English series as well as Rigby guided reading books and some Into English materials with all subgroups of ELLs within the integrated and standalone ENL programs. On Our Way to English provides students with exposure to oral language and literacy development, comprehensible input and standards based content area information. The entire curriculum is aligned with each grade represented (K-5). Materials and units are organized into content area themes. The units feature many different methods of teaching such as chants, songs, and language games as well as shared reading, guided reading, independent writing, hands on materials, and content area activities. The materials are also multicultural and help to connect ELLs prior knowledge with new learning. Classroom teachers also use Rigby On Our Way to English guided reading books. We have an ENL classroom library, multicultural literature, bilingual libraries, fiction and non-fiction big books, picture and bilingual dictionaries, and magazines & other authentic texts. These materials are used with newcomer ELLs, developing ELLs, as well as ELLs in special education. We also utilize online reading resources such as RAZ Kids and Person Success Net. Many visuals are used to support language learning, such as photographs, drawings, and video clips. Visual materials are helpful to all ELLs at each stage of language development. Centers are used both in the classroom as well as in the ESL program to help students develop language, with different centers for different subgroups of ELLs. Listening centers on different levels are used for all subgroups, vocabulary centers are differentiated to help newcomer ELLs develop basic vocabulary, and more complex academic vocabulary centers are used for more advanced ELLs. Centers with content area enforcement are available at different levels for newcomer ELLs, more advanced ELLs, and ELLs in special education. A variety of graphic organizers are used to assist ELLs at all stages and proficiency in various kinds and different levels of writing. Charts made both by the teacher and with the class are hung around the room to support students during lessons and independent work. The use of manipulatives, songs, poems & rhythm and TPR are useful for all ELLs as well as hands-on activities and 9  technological resources. In the classroom, supplemental materials such as flashcards, manipulatives and math games are used to help struggling students at all proficiency levels in mathematics. The science teacher also offers support to all ELLs using hands-on activities, manipulatives, flash cards, assistance in experimentation, and vocabulary development activities and reinforcement. Many materials have been purchased for use with ELLs in the mainstream classroom in order to make content more comprehensible. The school has purchased and teachers use: • Social Studies theme sets with posters and vocabulary cards that focus on content area vocabulary development. • A series of social studies books entitled “English Explorers” which are designed for English Language Learners. • Book Source Social Studies topic materials on lower reading levels. • Bridges and Navigators Social Studies materials written on multiple reading levels with frontloading and picture support. • Fiction sets of character stories on reading levels C-I. • Science topic Rigby books on topics such as water, animals, weather, family, nature, and math concepts ranging from reading level A-J. • FOSS science materials with hands on activities and materials, and bilingual Spanish/English books, which are made available to students. PS 247 also recognizes the importance of technology in education, especially for ELLs at all proficiency levels. Every classroom is equipped with a Smartboard, a class set of laptops, and shared document cameras. Smartboards are used for interactive learning, and also facilitate the use of video in instruction. The combination of visual and interactive learning is very powerful for all ELL students. PS 247 has also purchased the Imagine Learning program for beginner ELLs. The computer program is an interactive and engaging way for students to develop language and literacy skills using technological resources. Additionally, both ENL and classroom teachers utilize a variety of websites that facilitate language and literacy development for ELLs at all proficiency levels, such as Razkids and Reading A-Z, that offer leveled texts, brainpop.com which has content area videos on different topics and levels, and starfall.com, a phonics and basic literacy program for young and newcomer ELLs and students in special education. Lastly, the ENL classrooms are equipped with ipads loaded with educational apps that help students build language and literacy skills in an exciting, engaging, interactive way. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Classroom and ENL teachers allow students to make use of their native language in order to capitalize on their language abilities and natural strengths. Students have access to a bilingual lending library that they can browse while in school or bring home to read or share with parents. We also use bilingual flashcards, games, and an online library with bilingual e-books. Beginner ELLs are also encouraged to speak and write in their native language, which enables them to be active participants in class. The “Language Leader” program provides beginner ELLs with a “bilingual buddy” to provide translation of some academic information and instructions to the student in his/her native language. Teachers sometimes encourage students to discuss books in the native language, and often ask children to share vocabulary from their native language with the class. Students who are literate in their native language are given state exams in both English and their native language. They are also provided with translated glossaries and bilingual word-to-word dictionaries for additional support during the school day, on homework, and on in class assessments and state exams. Various people in the ENL program support ELLs. In addition to the 7 fully certified ENL teachers, some ELLs in special education are also supported by bilingual paraprofessionals. We have 1 Cantonese speaking paraprofessional (Lynn Cung) that accompanies a Cantonese speaking ELL who also receives special education services. We have 1 Albanian speaking paraprofessional (Mirije Cinari) that accompanies an Albanian speaking ELL. These paraprofessionals provide support to these ELLs during mini-lessons, group work, independent work, and share time. They provide both English language and translation, interpretation, and native language support when needed. These paraprofessionals also provide help in communicating with 0  these children’s parents when necessary. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Support services and resources correspond to students age and grade level when possible. In order to ensure materials are appropriate, we utilize grade level content area texts written on a lower, more appropriate reading level for ELLs, texts on identical topics that are written and available on different reading levels, high-interest/low-readability texts, and leveled/graded guided reading books. In order to ensure that instruction is grade appropriate, teachers modify their grade level lessons to meet the language, academic, and social needs of ELLs. Classroom and ENL teachers have worked together to develop modified curriculum maps for ELLs that offer activities and projects that are aligned with grade standards and curriculum that are on an appropriate language level for their ELLs. Teachers also modify grade level material to meet the needs of students. For example, a teacher may show a grade appropriate video, but play it on mute and narrate the video themselves in order to ensure that the input is comprehensible to their ELL students. Some materials that have been purchased for the mainstream classroom that are both grade level appropriate and language proficiency appropriate are: • Social Studies theme sets with posters and vocabulary cards that focus on content area vocabulary development. • A series of social studies books entitled “English Explorers” which are designed for English Language Learners. • Book Source Social Studies topic materials on lower reading levels. • Bridges and Navigators Social Studies materials written on multiple reading levels with frontloading and picture support. • Fiction sets of character stories on reading levels C-I. • Science topic Rigby books on topics such as water, animals, weather, family, nature, and math concepts ranging from reading level A-J. • FOSS science materials with hands on activities and materials, and bilingual Spanish/English books, which are made available to students. The ENL program also uses content that is grade level appropriate and has been or can be modified for instruction for ELLs. Some of these resources are: • Social studies picture books • Social studies photo libraries, posters and vocabulary cards • Maps and other geography visuals and hands on activities • Social studies and science theme sets with both reading materials, activities, and realia • The use of videos and slideshows • Content area books on various reading levels Academic intervention services are also modified to be age, grade, and linguistically appropriate for ELLs. Children participate in small group AIS services with other students on the grade, and instruction is differentiated to meet each child’s needs. For standalone ENL teachers group students both by grade and by level. Most groups are formed according to the grade and language level (i.e. 4th grade transitioning group), while some are mixed grade (i.e. 4th/5th entering/emerging ). For integrated ENL, students are serviced by grade, and we employ flexible grouping (heterogeneous and homogeneous) by proficiency level in order to best meet both the mandates and the and the academic and linguistic needs of our students. Instruction in each program model is aligned with children’s age, state and grade standards, and language proficiency level. Further, goals are set for both groups and individual students based on their academic and linguistic needs. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We use many different materials both in the standalone and integrated ENL programs, and in mainstream classrooms to meet the needs of ELLs. ENL teachers primarily use high quality children's literature and informational texts in the ENL program. Teachers develop units of study around children's books, also incorporating magazines, articles, short stories, folktales, fables, videos, pictures, etc. Additionally, we use other materials to supplement our studies. Some of these supplemental materials are the Rigby On Our Way to English series as well as Rigby guided reading books and some Into English materials with all subgroups of ELLs within the integrated and standalone ENL programs. On Our Way to English provides students with exposure to oral language and literacy development, comprehensible input and standards based content area information. The entire curriculum is aligned with each grade represented (K-5). Materials and units are organized into content area themes. The units feature many 1  different methods of teaching such as chants, songs, and language games as well as shared reading, guided reading, independent writing, hands on materials, and content area activities. The materials are also multicultural and help to connect ELLs prior knowledge with new learning. Classroom teachers also use Rigby On Our Way to English guided reading books. We have an ENL classroom library, multicultural literature, bilingual libraries, fiction and non-fiction big books, picture and bilingual dictionaries, and magazines & other authentic texts. These materials are used with newcomer ELLs, developing ELLs, as well as ELLs in special education. We also utilize online reading resources such as RAZ Kids and Person Success Net. Many visuals are used to support language learning, such as photographs, drawings, and video clips. Visual materials are helpful to all ELLs at each stage of language development. Centers are used both in the classroom as well as in the ESL program to help students develop language, with different centers for different subgroups of ELLs. Listening centers on different levels are used for all subgroups, vocabulary centers are differentiated to help newcomer ELLs develop basic vocabulary, and more complex academic vocabulary centers are used for more advanced ELLs. Centers with content area enforcement are available at different levels for newcomer ELLs, more advanced ELLs, and ELLs in special education. A variety of graphic organizers are used to assist ELLs at all stages and proficiency in various kinds and different levels of writing. Charts made both by the teacher and with the class are hung around the room to support students during lessons and independent work. The use of manipulatives, songs, poems & rhythm and TPR are useful for all ELLs as well as hands-on activities and technological resources. In the classroom, supplemental materials such as flashcards, manipulatives and math games are used to help struggling students at all proficiency levels in mathematics. The science teacher also offers support to all ELLs using hands-on activities, manipulatives, flash cards, assistance in experimentation, and vocabulary development activities and reinforcement. Many materials have been purchased for use with ELLs in the mainstream classroom in order to make content more comprehensible. The school has purchased and teachers use: • Social Studies theme sets with posters and vocabulary cards that focus on content area vocabulary development. • A series of social studies books entitled “English Explorers” which are designed for English Language Learners. • Book Source Social Studies topic materials on lower reading levels. • Bridges and Navigators Social Studies materials written on multiple reading levels with frontloading and picture support. • Fiction sets of character stories on reading levels C-I. • Science topic Rigby books on topics such as water, animals, weather, family, nature, and math concepts ranging from reading level A-J. • FOSS science materials with hands on activities and materials, and bilingual Spanish/English books, which are made available to students. PS 247 also recognizes the importance of technology in education, especially for ELLs at all proficiency levels. Every classroom is equipped with a Smartboard, a class set of laptops, and shared document cameras. Smartboards are used for interactive learning, and also facilitate the use of video in instruction. The combination of visual and interactive learning is very powerful for all ELL students. PS 247 has also purchased the Imagine Learning program for beginner ELLs. The computer program is an interactive and engaging way for students to develop language and literacy skills using technological resources. Additionally, both ENL and classroom teachers utilize a variety of websites that facilitate language and literacy development for ELLs at all proficiency levels, such as Razkids and Reading A-Z, that offer leveled texts, brainpop.com which has content area videos on different topics and levels, and starfall.com, a phonics and basic literacy program for young and newcomer ELLs and students in special education. Lastly, the ENL classrooms are equipped with ipads loaded with educational apps that help students build 2  language and literacy skills in an exciting, engaging, interactive way. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). PS 247 invites all Kindergarten parents to the school during the week before the start of the new school year. Our school's parent coordinator, assistant principal, principal and classroom teachers are available during this time. Parents come to school with their children and are given an orientation. Parents can meet their child’s teacher, the administration, other parents and the children in their child’s class. Parents are also given the opportunity to become familiar with the school building, and the curricular expectations of kindergarten. ELL parents are always invited to attend. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? There are currently no language electives offered at PS 247. We may consider supplemental, enrichment language electives at a later date. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? PS 247 does not currently have a dual language program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional Development for all personnel at the school will be as follows: ENL teachers and administrators provide professional development for all personnel who work with ELLs during select faculty conferences, admin periods, instructional team meetings, and one-on-one with teachers. Additional dates will be added to the calendar below as they are selected. Our instructional team’s focus this year is the continued implementation of the Common Core Standards. Throughout these meetings, we will also be exploring, discussing, and brainstorming ideas about the application of these standards with our ELL population. The professional development received at these instructional team meetings is always turn-keyed to classroom teachers and paraprofessionals. Classroom and ENL teachers also meet with the school’s literacy coaches and administrators multiple times per month for grade conferences and admin meetings. These meetings cover topics such as the Universal Design for Learning. Teachers, coaches, and administrators are always exploring ways to utilize the UDL concept for English Language Learners in order to make the Common Core Standards accessible to English Language Leaners. Additional Professional Development for ENL teachers and Coordinators will include UFT ESL/Bilingual Committee Workshops, ELL Literacy Workshops, and the NYS TESOL Conference. ENL teachers provide guidance & training to Pupil Accounting Secretary in the beginning of the year, and ongoing assistance with the registration and ELL intake process throughout the school year. Contracted Professional Development for classroom teachers K-5 also covers ELL topics. Professional Development at PS 247 for the 2015-2016 school year will be provided by Paul Bloomberg, Vicki Vinton, Arin Lavinia, Carl Anderson and Deborah Armitage. Paul Bloomberg's professional development workshops are around prioritizing and implementing the common core 3  standards, using success criteria in instruction, and helping students to develop self- and peer-assessment skills. Also included in Paul Bloomberg's PD are the bilingual progressions, and helping ELLs to meet the rigor of the common core standards. Vicki Vinton and Arin Lavinia's professional development are around guided reading techniques and working with all students (including ELLs) in reader's workshop. Carl Anderson focuses on supporting students in their writing during writer's workshop. Deborah Armitage's work is around math exemplar's and problem solving for all students, including English language learners. Because of our school's population, PS 247 always asks all professional developers to cover ELL topics within their planned professional development and area of expertise . Dates for these contracted professional development workshops have yet to be determined. Please see a tentative calendar of all PD below. Month: September/October Professional Development Topic: ELL Intake, New CR part 154 Regulations, new HLIS & relation to ELL intake process, Workshop Provider: ENL teachers Audience: Pupil Accounting Secretary Month: October Professional Development Topic: Language Leaders Expectations/Choosing Language Leaders Workshop Provider: Training and Guidance offered by ESL teachers Timeline: Various dates throughout the month Audience: Common Branch Teachers, ENL teachers, ENL Coordinator, Administration (principal and assistant principals), Special Education Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Guidance Counselor Month: October Professional Development Topic: CR Part 154 Regulations Workshop Provider: Field Support Office Audience: Principal, Assistant Principals, ELL Coordinator Month: November Professional Development Topic: Common Core Learning Standards and Success Criteria Workshop Provider: Paul Bloomberg Date: November 2-4, 2015 Audience: General Education Teachers, ENL teachers, ENL Coordinator, Cluster Teachers Paraprofessionals, Adminisrators (principals and assistant principals) Month: November Professional Development Topic: Common Core Standards and ELLs 4  Workshop Provider: NYS TESOL Date: 11/13-14/2015 Audience: ENL Teachers & Coordinator Month: November 30th Professional Development Topic: RL2 Inquiry Study, RI2 Inquiry Study, Common Core Standards and Bilingual Progressions, Success Criteria and Progressions/Continuums, Self and Peer Assessment Workshop Provider: Assitant Principal and Literacy Coach, Classroom Teachers Audience: Common Branch Teachers, ENL teachers, ENL Coordinator, Administration (principal and assistant principals), Special Education Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Guidance Counselor Month: December 7th Professional Development Topic: RL2 Inquiry Study, RI2 Inquiry Study, Common Core Standards and Bilingual Progressions, Success Criteria and Progressions/Continuums, Self and Peer Assessment Workshop Provider: Assitant Principal and Literacy Coach, Classroom Teachers Audience: Common Branch Teachers, ENL teachers, ENL Coordinator, Administration (principal and assistant principals), Special Education Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Guidance Counselor Month: December 14th Professional Development Topic: RL2 Inquiry Study, RI2 Inquiry Study, Common Core Standards and Bilingual Progressions, Success Criteria and Progressions/Continuums, Self and Peer Assessment Workshop Provider: Assitant Principal and Literacy Coach, Classroom Teachers Audience: Common Branch Teachers, ENL teachers, ENL Coordinator, Administration (principal and assistant principals), Special Education Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Guidance Counselor Month: December 21st Professional Development Topic: RL2 Inquiry Study, RI2 Inquiry Study, Common Core Standards and Bilingual Progressions, Success Criteria and Progressions/Continuums, Self and Peer Assessment Workshop Provider: Assitant Principal and Literacy Coach, Classroom Teachers Audience: Common Branch Teachers, ENL teachers, ENL Coordinator, Administration (principal and assistant principals), Special Education Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Guidance Counselor Month: January 4th Professional Development Topic: RL2 Inquiry Study, RI2 Inquiry Study, Common Core Standards and Bilingual Progressions, Success Criteria and Progressions/Continuums, Self and Peer Assessment 5  Workshop Provider: Assitant Principal and Literacy Coach, Classroom Teachers Audience: Common Branch Teachers, ENL teachers, ENL Coordinator, Administration (principal and assistant principals), Special Education Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Guidance Counselor Month: January 11th Professional Development Topic: RL2 Inquiry Study, RI2 Inquiry Study, Common Core Standards and Bilingual Progressions, Success Criteria and Progressions/Continuums, Self and Peer Assessment Workshop Provider: Assitant Principal and Literacy Coach, Classroom Teachers Audience: Common Branch Teachers, ENL teachers, ENL Coordinator, Administration (principal and assistant principals), Special Education Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Guidance Counselor Month: January 25th Professional Development Topic: RL2 Inquiry Study, RI2 Inquiry Study, Common Core Standards and Bilingual Progressions, Success Criteria and Progressions/Continuums, Self and Peer Assessment Workshop Provider: Assitant Principal and Literacy Coach, Classroom Teachers Audience: Common Branch Teachers, ENL teachers, ENL Coordinator, Administration (principal and assistant principals), Special Education Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Guidance Counselor Month: February 1st Professional Development Topic: RL2 Inquiry Study, RI2 Inquiry Study, Common Core Standards and Bilingual Progressions, Success Criteria and Progressions/Continuums, Self and Peer Assessment Workshop Provider: Assitant Principal and Literacy Coach, Classroom Teachers Audience: Common Branch Teachers, ENL teachers, ENL Coordinator, Administration (principal and assistant principals), Special Education Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Guidance Counselor Month: February 22nd Professional Development Topic: RL2 Inquiry Study, RI2 Inquiry Study, Common Core Standards and Bilingual Progressions, Success Criteria and Progressions/Continuums, Self and Peer Assessment Workshop Provider: Assitant Principal and Literacy Coach, Classroom Teachers Audience: Common Branch Teachers, ENL teachers, ENL Coordinator, Administration (principal and assistant principals), Special Education Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Guidance Counselor Month: February 29th Professional Development Topic: RL2 Inquiry Study, RI2 Inquiry Study, Common Core Standards and Bilingual Progressions, Success Criteria and Progressions/Continuums, Self and Peer Assessment Workshop Provider: 6  Assitant Principal and Literacy Coach, Classroom Teachers Audience: Common Branch Teachers, ENL teachers, ENL Coordinator, Administration (principal and assistant principals), Special Education Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Guidance Counselor Month: March 7th Professional Development Topic: RL2 Inquiry Study, RI2 Inquiry Study, Common Core Standards and Bilingual Progressions, Success Criteria and Progressions/Continuums, Self and Peer Assessment Workshop Provider: Assitant Principal and Literacy Coach, Classroom Teachers Audience: Common Branch Teachers, ENL teachers, ENL Coordinator, Administration (principal and assistant principals), Special Education Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Guidance Counselor Month: March 14th Professional Development Topic: RL2 Inquiry Study, RI2 Inquiry Study, Common Core Standards and Bilingual Progressions, Success Criteria and Progressions/Continuums, Self and Peer Assessment Workshop Provider: Assitant Principal and Literacy Coach, Classroom Teachers Audience: Common Branch Teachers, ENL teachers, ENL Coordinator, Administration (principal and assistant principals), Special Education Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Guidance Counselor Month: March 21st Professional Development Topic: RL2 Inquiry Study, RI2 Inquiry Study, Common Core Standards and Bilingual Progressions, Success Criteria and Progressions/Continuums, Self and Peer Assessment Workshop Provider: Assitant Principal and Literacy Coach, Classroom Teachers Audience: Common Branch Teachers, ENL teachers, ENL Coordinator, Administration (principal and assistant principals), Special Education Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Guidance Counselor Month: March 28th Professional Development Topic: RL2 Inquiry Study, RI2 Inquiry Study, Common Core Standards and Bilingual Progressions, Success Criteria and Progressions/Continuums, Self and Peer Assessment Workshop Provider: Assitant Principal and Literacy Coach, Classroom Teachers Audience: Common Branch Teachers, ENL teachers, ENL Coordinator, Administration (principal and assistant principals), Special Education Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Guidance Counselor Month: April 4th Professional Development Topic: RL2 Inquiry Study, RI2 Inquiry Study, Common Core Standards and Bilingual Progressions, Success Criteria and Progressions/Continuums, Self and Peer Assessment Workshop Provider: Assitant Principal and Literacy Coach, Classroom Teachers 7  Audience: Common Branch Teachers, ENL teachers, ENL Coordinator, Administration (principal and assistant principals), Special Education Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Guidance Counselor Month: April 11th Professional Development Topic: RL2 Inquiry Study, RI2 Inquiry Study, Common Core Standards and Bilingual Progressions, Success Criteria and Progressions/Continuums, Self and Peer Assessment Workshop Provider: Assitant Principal and Literacy Coach, Classroom Teachers Audience: Common Branch Teachers, ENL teachers, ENL Coordinator, Administration (principal and assistant principals), Special Education Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Guidance Counselor Month: April 18th Professional Development Topic: RL2 Inquiry Study, RI2 Inquiry Study, Common Core Standards and Bilingual Progressions, Success Criteria and Progressions/Continuums, Self and Peer Assessment Workshop Provider: Assitant Principal and Literacy Coach, Classroom Teachers Audience: Common Branch Teachers, ENL teachers, ENL Coordinator, Administration (principal and assistant principals), Special Education Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Guidance Counselor Month: April/May Professional Development Topic: NYSESLAT Adminsitration & Scoring Workshop Provider: Department of ELLs Date: TBD Audience: ENL teachers & ENL coordinator Month: May 2nd Professional Development Topic: RL2 Inquiry Study, RI2 Inquiry Study, Common Core Standards and Bilingual Progressions, Success Criteria and Progressions/Continuums, Self and Peer Assessment Workshop Provider: Assitant Principal and Literacy Coach, Classroom Teachers Audience: Common Branch Teachers, ENL teachers, ENL Coordinator, Administration (principal and assistant principals), Special Education Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Guidance Counselor Month: May 9th Professional Development Topic: RL2 Inquiry Study, RI2 Inquiry Study, Common Core Standards and Bilingual Progressions, Success Criteria and Progressions/Continuums, Self and Peer Assessment Workshop Provider: Assitant Principal and Literacy Coach, Classroom Teachers Audience: Common Branch Teachers, ENL teachers, ENL Coordinator, Administration (principal and assistant principals), Special 8  Education Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Guidance Counselor Month: May 16th Professional Development Topic: RL2 Inquiry Study, RI2 Inquiry Study, Common Core Standards and Bilingual Progressions, Success Criteria and Progressions/Continuums, Self and Peer Assessment Workshop Provider: Assitant Principal and Literacy Coach, Classroom Teachers Audience: Common Branch Teachers, ENL teachers, ENL Coordinator, Administration (principal and assistant principals), Special Education Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Guidance Counselor Month: May 23rd Professional Development Topic: RL2 Inquiry Study, RI2 Inquiry Study, Common Core Standards and Bilingual Progressions, Success Criteria and Progressions/Continuums, Self and Peer Assessment Workshop Provider: Assitant Principal and Literacy Coach, Classroom Teachers Audience: Common Branch Teachers, ENL teachers, ENL Coordinator, Administration (principal and assistant principals), Special Education Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Guidance Counselor Month: June 6th Professional Development Topic: RL2 Inquiry Study, RI2 Inquiry Study, Common Core Standards and Bilingual Progressions, Success Criteria and Progressions/Continuums, Self and Peer Assessment Workshop Provider: Assitant Principal and Literacy Coach, Classroom Teachers Audience: Common Branch Teachers, ENL teachers, ENL Coordinator, Administration (principal and assistant principals), Special Education Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Guidance Counselor Month: June 13th Professional Development Topic: RL2 Inquiry Study, RI2 Inquiry Study, Common Core Standards and Bilingual Progressions, Success Criteria and Progressions/Continuums, Self and Peer Assessment Workshop Provider: Assitant Principal and Literacy Coach, Classroom Teachers Audience: Common Branch Teachers, ENL teachers, ENL Coordinator, Administration (principal and assistant principals), Special Education Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Guidance Counselor Month: June 20th Professional Development Topic: RL2 Inquiry Study, RI2 Inquiry Study, Common Core Standards and Bilingual Progressions, Success Criteria and Progressions/Continuums, Self and Peer Assessment Workshop Provider: Assitant Principal and Literacy Coach, Classroom Teachers Audience: Common Branch Teachers, ENL teachers, ENL Coordinator, Administration (principal and assistant principals), Special Education Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Guidance Counselors 9  Month: TBD/Monthly Professional Development Topic: TBD Workshop Provider: UFT ESL/Bilingual Committee Date: Multiple Monthly Dates TBD Audience: ENL Teachers & ENL Coordinator Month: TBD Professional Development Topic: Differentiated Math Problem Solving (including ELL topics) Workshop Provider: Deborah Armitage Date: Multiple dates TBD Audience: Classroom Teachers Month: TBD Professional Development Topic: Guided Reading and Close Reading (including ELL topics) Workshop Provider: Vicky Vinton Dates: Multiple dates TBD Audience: Classroom Teachers Month: TBD Professional Development Topic: Guided Reading and Close Reading (including ELL topics) Workshop Provider: Arin Lavinia Date: Multiple dates TBD Audience: Classroom Teachers, ENL teachers & ENL Coordinator Month: TBD Professional Development Topic: Writing (including ELL topics) Workshop Provider: Carl Anderson Date: Multiple dates TBD Audience: Classroom Teachers, ENL teachers & ENL coordinator Throughout the year, classroom teachers, ENL teachers, literacy coaches and administrators meet multiple times per month 0  for in-house professional development during common preps, administrative meetings, and the instructional team meetings to discuss the implementation of the Common Core, the Danielson’s rubric, and Universal Design for Learning. During these sessions, how to make the Common Core Standards accessible to English Language Learners is always discussed, particularly in the context of Response to Intervention and the Universal Design for Learning. Additionally, contracted professional development for classroom teachers as well as ENL teachers also focuses on the common core and always covers topics relating to ELL accessibility to the common core state standards. Professional development this year will be provided for classroom teachers by Carl Anderson (Writer’s Workshop, the Common Core) and Deborah Armitage (Differentiating Math Problem Solving), Paul Bloomberg (Implementing the Common Core), Vicki Vinton (Guided Reading and Close Reading), Ain Lavinia (Guided Reading and Close Reading). Because of our school's population, PS 247 always asks all professional developers to cover ELL topics within their planned professional development and area of expertise . Professional Development for ENL teachers and coordinator will be provided by the UFT Bilingual/ESL Committee (The common core and ELLs [Geography and the common core], the NYCDOE Office of ELLs (NYSESLAT Testing and Literacy Instruction, The ELL Literacy Institute), and the NYS TESOL Conference. Each of these workshops focus on the relation of the Common Core Learning Standards and English Language Learners. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. ENL teachers provide support and are available to staff, students, and parents to assist ELLs as they transition from elementary to middle school. ENL teachers consult with parents, teachers, and students on issues related to transitioning to middle school and the social aspects of coming into a new country or new school. ENL teachers, administrators, and parent coordinators also provide information to parents, teachers, and other school staff about ENL programs in middle schools, exam information, the general transition period, and creating support networks in their new school. Parent Coordinator and 5th grade teachers guide all 5th grade families (including the families of ELLs) through the middle school selection process, provide them with information about special testing for middle school admission, etc. In addition to this, our school holds multiple informational assemblies for students hosted by neighborhood middle schools. ENL teachers and the parent coordinator reach out to parents about any issues/questions they may have regarding their child’s future. Parent coordinator provides a workshop for parents (with translators present) about the middle school selection process, the middle school application process, and offers individual assistance to parents for middle school applications. As students grow up and work through middle school and trasition to High School, the PS 247 staff continues to maintain relationships with families and provide support where they can as their children grow. All ELL and non-ELL staff has received or are working towards the minimum ELL training. In recent years, ENL/ELL professional development has been contracted through Accelerating minds, St. John's University, America’s Choice, Catherine Brown, the Center for Integrated Teacher Education (CITE) as well as in-house workshops, lectures, presentations, modeled lessons, reading groups, and administrative meetings. Ongoing professional development will be offered to current staff as well as new teachers. New teachers are identified and provided with professional development and extra support in working with ELLs. Teachers are also made aware of various professional development opportunities available outside of the regular school day, such as the UFT Bilingual/ESL Committee Meetings, State TESOL conferene, and office of ELL trainings and professional development sessions. Documentation of the hours (or percentages of professional development -- 50% for ESOL certified teachers and 15% for general ed teachers) of training will be placed in the personal file of all participating teachers and staff. 1  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? ENL teachers meet annually with individual parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. Meetings take place during the time allocated for parent contact, during the school day, and during telephone conferences, and as a last resource, in writing, if parents are unable to come to the school. Interpreters from our staff or from the over-the-phone translation unit would be made available during these meetings. ENL teachers keep logs of all parent contact. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents of newcomer ELLs are invited to attend the parent orientation meeting to be introduced to the program choices available to them. Parents are also invited to school at different times throughout the school year in order to participate in classroom celebrations and student work showcases, as well as the family literacy program. Lower grade parents are invited to read with the children during morning conferences. Parents are also invited to attend select Title III after school sessions in order to celebrate their students’ work. Also, parents are involved in various activities such as: *Monthly workshops with guest speakers on various topics *Lending Library where parents can borrow books *Games, bingo and karaoke nights *Field trips *PTA activities *Fundraising activities *Parents as Reading Partners In our school we utilize the Translation and Interpretation Unit. Phone calls home are made with the assistance of the over the phone translation services, and most letters are sent home in both parents’ native language and English. PS 247’s Parent Coordinator conducts regular English and Citizenship classes for parents who wish to attend. Classes are held twice weekly during the morning hours. Parents are invited to school and Title I trips. Parents can become involved in the PTA, Title I Committee, Leadership Team, Learning Leaders, and Parents as Reading Partners. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Christopher E. Ogno, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 3  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 247 School DBN: 20K247 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Christopher E. Ogno Title Principal Erin O'hanlon Assistant Principal Melissa Sheredos Parent Coordinator Alison DuBois-Eker ENL/Bilingual Teacher Li Yuan Li Parent Erin Sauchelli/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Loredana Torelli/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Mary Toner Stephanie Spatola Coach Coach Sue Z. Meyerson School Counselor Karina Costentino Aaron Perez Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Catherine Dean/Reading Other Maureen Morisano/Sp. Ed Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 4  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 20K247 School Name: PS 247 NYC College Partnership Elementary School Superintendent: K. Costentino The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Alison Dubois ESL Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. 1. PS 247 distributed the Language Preference Survey created by the NYCDOE (available on the NYCDOE website) to every child’s parent (grades Pre-k-5) in order to assess our school’s written translation and oral interpretation needs, in addition to consulting the Parent's Preferred Language Report (RCPL) from ATS, to ensure that parents are provided with information in a language they can understand. Surveys were distributed to children, were brought home, and returned to the child’s teacher. Surveys were then collected and the data was compiled. In addition to the surveys, parents respond to questions about their language of preference on the Home Language Identification Surveys (HLIS) their Emergency Contact Cards, and teachers also lend information that they’ve learned about the language in which parents prefer to communicate through parent interviews, meetings, conversations, etc. 5  The surveys collected were then organized by class and by grade. We compiled the data and created class lists with the language of preference of each child’s parents listed next to the child’s name. Each teacher received their class list with language preferences as well as the original surveys. A set of class lists was also distributed to other school staff that have frequent contact with parents, including the ENL teachers, administrators, school aids, guidance counselor, SBST team, resource room teacher, and to the main office. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral ALBANIAN ARABIC CEBUANO CHINESE ANY CANTONESE DARI/FARSI/PERSIAN GEORGIAN GREEK HEBREW ITALIAN JAPANESE KURDISH MOLDAVIAN MANDARIN ENGLISH POLISH ROMANIAN RUSSIAN RWANDA SPANISH TURKISH TADZHIK (AKA TAJIK) URDU UKRAINIAN UZBEK VIETNAMESE See above See above 7 4 1 193 0 1 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 581 4 1 39 1 41 0 1 7 3 6 2 0.78 0.45 0.11 21.59 0 0.11 0.11 0 0 0.11 0 0 0 0 64.99 0.45 0.11 4.36 0.11 4.59 0 0.11 0.78 0.34 0.67 0.22 16 13 0 171 121 1 6 1 1 4 1 1 1 17 328 12 1 77 1 80 1 2 17 5 11 5 1.79 1.45 0 19.13 13.53 0.11 0.67 0.11 0.11 0.45 0.11 0.11 0.11 1.9 36.69 1.34 0.11 8.61 0.11 8.95 0.11 0.22 1.9 0.56 1.23 0.56 See above See above See above See above See above See above See above See above 6  See above See above See above See above See above 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. None Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. 1. PS 247 provides written translation for the following information: -Letters home from teachers and school leadership -Permission slips -After School Program information -Information about state testing -Ongoing -Flyers -Calendars -Report cards -Newsletters -Memos -Ongoing -3 weeks prior to start date -February/March 2019 -Program invitations -Notices about parent involvement activities -Ongoing -9/2018 -11/18, 3/19, 6/19 -Notices about parent teacher conferences -Monthly PS 247 uses the Translation and Interpretation Unit (T&I Unit) provided by the NYC Department of Education for the majority of its written translation needs. In order to ensure that materials are translated in time for timely distribution, we submit letters, forms, surveys, notifications, calendars, at least 2 weeks in advance of distribution. Teachers are provided with contact information for the T&I unit, and there are staff available for assistance that are familiar with the submission process in case one were in need of assistance. Additionally, we have in-house personnel available to assist with translation if time does not allow use of the T&I Unit, such as in a last minute notice. Staff on-hand available for translation & interpretation represent the following languages: Spanish, Italian, Russian, Albanian, Azeri, Turkish, Arabic, Chinese, Hebrew, and French. 7  -Surveys -Ongoing -School website -3 weeks prior to start date -Native Language Exams -3 weeks prior to start date -9/2018, 11/2018, 3/2019, 5/2019 -Ongoing -September 2018 and ongoing -February 2019 See above See above See above See above See above See above See above See above See above 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide 2. PS 247 provides oral translation for the following information and meetings: -Phone calls home to parents -Parent orientation and bilingual/ESL program information -Parent teacher conferences -Individual parent meetings -Informational meetings and social gatherings -PTA meetings - IEP conferences -Family Literacy events -Other teacher-parent contact by various school staff (such as guidance -Ongoing -September 2018, and ongoing throughout the year -9/2018, 11/2018, 3/2019, 5/2019 -Ongoing interpretation service(s)? PS 247 uses in-house staff for oral interpretation for most of our interpretation needs. Languages represented among the staff available for oral interpretation are the following: Spanish, Italian, Russian, Albanian, Azeri, Turkish, Arabic, Chinese, Hebrew, and French. Additionally, PS 247 uses the Translation and Interpretation Unit (T&I Unit) provided by the NYC Department of Education for the remainder of it's oral interpretation needs. Teachers are provided with the phone number for the T&I Unit, and are given assistance by experienced staff to use the over-the-phone interpretation unit if they are unfamiliar. 8  counselor, attendance teacher, SBST team, etc.) -Monthly ongoing -Native Language exams when the exam is not available in the printed form -Monthly/ongoing -Ongoing -Ongoing -Ongoing Lastly, especially for the instance of state testing oral interpretation, PS 247 has used Translation and Interpretation funding to hire translators for interpretation of the state math and science exams when the exam is not available printed in the child's first language, and when we do not have staff in the building to translate said language. . See above See above See above -April & May 2019 See above See above See above See above See above See above 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of an emergency, school would use in-house staff for over the phone interpretation with families, or would use the T&I unit provided by the NYCDOE in the instance that we do not have staff available for such translation and interpretation services. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 9  Teachers are provide with Chancellor's Regulation A-663 at the opening faculty conference. Each staff member is also provided with a letter outlining the contact information of the T& I unit, how to make use of the unit, and also of the staff in the building available for interpretation services if necessary. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 3. PS 247 fulfills Section VII of Chancellor’s Regulations A-663 regarding parental notification for translation and interpretation services in the following ways: -Important documents are translated and sent home with children at the beginning of the year and in a timely fashion throughout the rest of the school year. -Welcome poster indicating the availability of translation services are hung at the entrance of the school building, at the school safety officer’s desk, in stairwells, and in the main office. -Our school provides services such as translation, assistance, welcoming, and kindness to parents in need of language access services in order to ensure that they are not prevented from reaching the school’s administrative offices solely due to language barriers. -Forms, letters, signs and other information are translated using the Translation and Interpretation unit if the information is not available in a parent’s language from the NYCDOE. -Language ID guide is available at security desk, in the main office, and with the parent coordinator. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? PS 247 is always in close contact with parents through individual parent meetings and phone calls, parents teacher conferences, open school nights, family events, school celebrations and activities, etc. When translation and interpretation services are available, we always ask parents for feedback immediately following the meeting/conference/contact. We continuously survey parents orally to get feedback on translation and interpretation services, and carefully consider feedback, suggestions, and support from parents and the community. 0 
