 School Name: 21K253 P.S. 253 Principal: LISA SPERONI   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Ezra Jack Keats Magnet School of Multicultural Humanities 32100010253 Pre-K - 5 School Number (DBN): 21K253 601 Oceanview Avenue, Brooklyn, New York 11235 718-332-3331 Phone Number: 718-743-7194 Fax: Lisa Speroni lsperon@school.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 21 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Lisa Speroni Melissa Musman AishaAsghar/ErumHanif Melissa Musman Aisha Asghar N/A N/A N/A District Information Isabel DiMola Superintendent: 1401 Emmons Avenue, Brooklyn, New York 11235 Idimola@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-648-0209 Phone Number: 718-648-2165 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Brooklyn South Mauricievede Govia FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 415 98 th Street, Brooklyn, New York 11209 n/a Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-759-4862 Phone Number: 718-759-4960 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Lisa Speroni Melissa Musman ErumHanif/Aisha Asghar n/a Denise Romero Myra Wenger Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Josephine Chiofolo Toniann Coladonato OxanaIvasyuk Iram Jabbar Laura Xochitecatl NilaJaffar N/A N/A N/A N/A Member/ Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview Mission statement – To be courageous as we set and put into action student and teacher goals connected to research based principals and our own professional conscience. Throughout the course of each year we build on this courage and set increasingly rigorous and challenging goals. This will enable us to achieve positive results evidenced by measurable student achievement   Vision Statement – We see our school as a community where all members: Students, staff, and parents respect, support and meet the needs of students. We strive to create an environment where learning, creativity and participation take place. Ideally, the members of our community will be lifelong learners who are responsible and accountable so that they will become productive members in our school and society. They will develop decision-making and critical thinking skills and the ability to communicate effectively. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 253 is located in the Brighton Beach section of Brooklyn. This is a low income, ethnically diverse community. Our school’s population, currently 976 students in grades Pre-K -5 reflects this diversity. The ethnicity break down at PS 253 is as follows: 2018-2019: K-5 School Population : 940 Students exclusive of Pre K (36) Total Population 976 Hispanic 37% (346 out of 940) American Indian/Alaskan 1% (9 out of 940) Asian 35.% (332 out of 940) Hawaiian/Pacific Islander .50 % (4 out of 940) African American .42% (2 out of 940) Caucasian 26% (239 out of 940) Multi-racial .63% (6 out of 940) SWD 13% (139 out of 940) ENL 22% (205 out of 940) Our Main Building is fully utilized including a transportable unit housing 2 classrooms. The current breakdown of classes is as follows: 2 full day Pre-K classes 7 Kindergarten classes (4 General Education, 2 ICT, 1 Self-Contained 12:1:1) 6 Grade 1 classes (3 General Education, 2 ICT, 1 Self-Contained 12:1:1) 6 Grade 2 classes (3 General Education, 2 ICT, 1 Self-Contained 12:1:1) 5 Grade 3 classes (3 General Education, 2 ICT) 5 Grade 4 classes (3 General Education, 2 ICT) 0  5 Grade 5 classes (3 General Education, 2 ICT) 1 Self Contained Grade 3-4-5 Bridge 12: 1 A pedagogical Staff of 81 assigned and fully licensed teachers and 30 Paraprofessionals support the student population. We have eight Cluster positions inclusive of :Technology Art, Theater, Dance, Music, Science 1, Science 2, Library and Physical Education. Currently our Performing Arts Dept. provides students an opportunity to use the venue of the Arts to strengthen the social emotional needs of our students. Together, with their teacher the students engaged in dramatic arts performances, choral performances and dance performances as separate entities as well as culminating pieces throughout the school year. We have seen an increase in our students (inclusive of SWD's and ENL's) applying to and gaining entrance into the specialty J.H.S within and around the district. These placements include but are not limited to Mark Twain, I.S.303, Bay Academy and Kingsborough. This year our school was once again recognized as a N.Y.C Respect For All School. We continue to work with students staff and parents to foster Emotional intelligence for all stake holders. This year we anticipate participating in "Ruler" a Social Emotional program which will assist us in deepening our understanding about the Social Emotional health of our school community . We believe students learn best when they feel positive about themselves,developing skills to assist them with their everyday life , feel safe and ,have agency . To that end this year we were selected by the Disney Foundation to be able to experience the magic of Disney within our own school. As part of the three year grant the students elected to perform the Lion King(year one) ,Aladdin (year two) and this year Jungle Book . As part of this Partnership we continue to collaborate with students of Grady H.S who are assisting us with the scenery and stage design. In addition to and as part of our Respect for All initiatives as well as our "Pay it Forward" campaign our students performed for the Senior center where our students continue to participate in community service activities for the past 5 year This year our school has elected to continue our Student Government Club . P.S. 253 Student Government was founded upon the premise that students who develop civic pride and responsibility will, as a result demonstrate empathy and respect for the diverse community in which they live. The club has had an active year sponsoring activities which have allowed their members opportunities to engage in positive interaction between students and their fellow citizens, 1  We continue to work with Ballroom Basix to provide our students an opportunity to gain a deeper understanding of the various styles of dance. This year our Dance teacher collaborated with the Dance teacher from P.S. 216, another District 21 school and together the students perform each dance number partnered with students from their neighboring school. This activity provides students an opportunity to meet and perform with peers outside of the school community. This fosters an opportunity for students to appreciate a culture and community other than their own. Opportunities such as these support the vision of the Chancellor which speaks directly to the development of social-emotional health of our students. As a school community we are committed to raising our student’s awareness about personal health and wellness . Our Physical Education teacher continues to administer the N.Y.S Fitness Test to students in order to focus on student wellness. Currently the Physical Education teacher provides students before school and lunch time tournaments based on the most recent Unit of Study. Students additionally have an opportunity to select Physical Education as their additional Club period during Friday Club Time. These opportunities have resulted in an increase of students applying to test for Athletics during the Middle School selection process as well as insure a deep understanding of "what it means to be healthy “within each of our students. In addition to the above , we became a "Move to Improve School" . All teachers have been trained maximizing opportunities to incorporate P.E. into the daily curriculum. This year we have elected to expand the boundaries of our school by collaborating with schools within our district; specifically P.S.101 in various inter- mural sports activities. We look forward to growing this program as we move into the next school year. We will continue to follow the N.Y.S Social Studies curriculum,using Passport . We will continue to work to infuse Social Studies through all areas of the curriculum. Our Library Cluster will enhance this work by providing students an opportunity to deepen their understanding of writing across all content areas. Through this venue our students develop a deeper love and appreciation of reading and writing. Our Library/Technology teacher has created a school newspaper that affords our students a venue within in which to enter the world of news broadcasting. These opportunities have resulted in more of our students applying for and being accepted into the creative writing programs in the specialized J.H.S within and surrounding the district. Moreover it has instilled a confidence in the children that carries over in all areas of their academic life at PS 253. Our Arts cluster's use of visual arts enables our students to integrate art and design into the daily curriculum. Our Science Clusters focus is to offer students opportunities to understand ,make predictions about , and adapt to an increasingly complex scientific and technological world .In order to align our program with the state and city standards . In grades Pre K -5. This year we will begin exploring the Amplify program and the Next Generation science standards. 2  Each year the Science Clusters collaborate to host our Annual Science Fair. At this fair students on each grade both together and independent of their teachers demonstrate their understanding of the varying scientific concepts taught throughout the school year. The students serve as school tour guides and activity coordinators in order to provide hands on experience to all guests of the fair. This joint venture allows our school community to see firsthand how good teaching aligns to student learning. During the course of the school year our clusters endeavor to provide parents an opportunity to participate in Cluster activities similar to those that their children are provided throughout the school year. This has taken on many forms including trips, weekly classes (Zumba, ) weekend workshops and activities hosted by our Parent Coordinator, Marquis Studios as well as Staff members. Together with their children parents are provided a venue within which to spend time with their children. We believe that these opportunities both strengthen community and family ties and provide parents the suggestions and tools to work with their children at home in order to extend and reinforce concepts the children have learned during the school day. As a Title I SWP school, funding sources are Conceptually Consolidated to support a standards based education designed to enable all students to attain and or exceed grade level promotional targets. Services are provided and /or supervised by licensed teachers. Parents are provided updates about their child’s performance via Parent Engagement Opportunities, Parent Teacher Conferences and parent Engagement time afforded to teachers and parents on a weekly basis. In addition workshops are provided separately to parents throughout the school year in order to assist the parents in meeting their child’s needs at home. P.S. 253 have met all its AYP targets and is designated as a “School In Good Standing”. P.S. 253 boasts an instructional program centering on research based instructional practices. In the early childhood grades, the six dimensions of reading identified by the National Reading Panel are stressed as a means to create a strong foundation for our Pre-K-2 students. A Comprehensive Literacy approach using Core Knowledge/Fundations Pre-K-2 and Expeditionary Learning grades 3-5, Writing Sampling (WSII) for our Pre-K students, Independent /Paired Reading/Shared Reading/Guided Reading instruction and Writer’s Workshop across the curriculum are integrated on all grade levels. The program is implemented during a 135 minute literacy block for grades K-5. Classroom libraries, and academic support personnel, as well will further support literacy instruction. Research shows that literacy and oral language instruction should be integrated from the earliest language learning experiences. Research has also identified the fact that it takes ELL learners an average of 5 to 7 years to catch up to their native speaking peers. Our goal this year is to teach our students to speak English while they are learning to read and while they are acquiring content area knowledge and writing skills.This year we will pay particular attention to the Writing Modality portion of the N.Y.S NYSESLAT exam. Using Title III funds we will continue to expand our after school programs to include Math and Literacy for the ELL learner. In addition a portion of these funds will support teacher Professional Development in the areas of ENL strategy instruction. According to the National Council of Supervisors of Math teaching children how to use math to solve problems is the principal reason to teach math. For the 2018-19 school year, we will continue to implement Go Math K-5 and My Math for Pre-K making modifications to the curriculum to best meet the needs of our students. This will include a focus in on incorporating activities in math that promote conceptual understanding. In addition we will be using Exemplars to support students in grades 1-5 in the area of problem solving along with professional development from Generation Ready .These programs focus on problem solving strategies such as, posing questions, analyzing situations, translating and illustrating results as well as solving problems through multiple approaches and building 3  conceptual understanding of concepts. Math and task oriented activities offer students opportunities for small group instruction. Portfolios and diagnostic assessments drive instruction to monitor student progress. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are.  Our Special Education Department includes: One full time Special Education Supervisor, one full time Trilingual School Psychologist (Russian, English and Spanish), one full time bilingual Family Worker (Spanish), one full time Occupational Therapist, one part time Physical Therapist, two full time Speech Teachers, one full time Guidance Counselor, one full time Bilingual Social Worker (Spanish), and one IEP Teacher. There are two teams; the RTI Team (Response To Intervention Team), as well as the SIT Team (School Implementation Team). The Goal of the RTI (Response to Intervention Team): The goal of the RTI team is to provide early identification of At-Risk students which affords both teachers and service providers an opportunity to work collaboratively in order to ensure academic success. Data continues to support our belief that early academic intervention minimizes the need for referrals to Special Education. Early identification of At-Risk students provides the school the opportunity to monitor the success of current At-Risk Services and make modifications to these services in a timely fashion. It should be noted that the team functions collaboratively in an effort to assist the classroom teacher in creating an instructional plan for each student. Each team member brings a particular expertise to the team; however, it is the classroom teacher’s responsibility to provide the team with data, assessments, and anecdotal history (both academic and social). Social history is often derived from articulation with the previous teacher, discussion with family, and articulation with the Parent Coordinator. The RTI Three-Tiered Model encompasses Tier 1: Universal/School wide instructional practices, High Quality core instruction that evidences rigor that is aligned with the building’s Curriculum Initiatives is essential to providing students opportunities to circumvent special education referrals. Tier 1 instruction supports the Common Core Standards and is developed through a UDL model of instruction within the framework of Units of Study, differentiated lesson planning via Core Knowledge, Expeditionary Learning, and Go Math. Tier 2 focuses on targeted small-group instructional practices and intervention focusing on small group differentiated instruction, guided practice and our RTI intervention program. Tier 3: incorporates intensive individual instructional practices and intervention. Tier 3 interventions are designed for students who demonstrate insufficient progress in Tier 2, or whom assessments indicate may be in need of more intensive intervention. The RTI Members include: The SIT Team ( School Implementation Team) focuses on the training to all staff inclusive of Paraprofessionals, on the development of writing a quality IEP including but not limited to educational benefits, Least Restrictive Environment, and alignment of Performance and goals. The areas of focus for the SIT Team include the development of staff and the School Assessment Team on procedural safeguards and school based IEP systems and procedures. Reviewing the compliance and educational integrity of IEP’s and the discussion of ensuring that teachers integrate the CCLS when designing IEP SMART goals, ensuring aligned lesson plans and progress monitoring systems. The SIT Team is involved in identifying the next action steps, persons responsible in reviewing upcoming cases and tracking systems. Monthly SIT meetings are scheduled. The SIT Team reviews and discusses Psycho-Educational's , as well as informal observations conducted. The SIT Team reviews and discusses the status of current cases, movement of students to less restrictive and more restrictive environments as well as informal 4  and formal Behavior Intervention Plans. Although final decisions for services and placement are made at the EPC, each case is discussed in an effort to ensure that there is seamless amongst all constituents. Compliance, specifically Annual Review, Triennial, initial and related service compliance reports are discussed and analyzed at the SIT meetings as well. SIT Members: Principal, 3 Assistant Principals, related service providers, School Psychologist, School Social Worker, and IEP Teacher. Special Population Consideration English Language Learners (ENLs) ENL Population 2018-19: 20%(192:940) ENL Population 2017-18: 22% (205 :940 ENL Population Percentage 2016-17: 25% (221 : 940) Kindergarten: ENL Proficiency  According to Fountas & Pinnell running records, 64 % (32 out 50) of ENL students were reading at or above proficiency level by the end of 2017-2018 school year.  According to Fountas & Pinnell running records, 51% (31 out 63) of ENL students were reading at or above proficiency level by the end of 2016-2017 school year. Grade 1: ENL Proficiency  According to Fountas & Pinnell running records, 66% (39 out 59) of ENL students were reading at or above proficiency level by the end of 2017-2018 school year.  According to Fountas & Pinnell running records, 56% (40 out of 73) of ENL students were reading at or above proficiency level by the end of 2016-2017 school year. Grade 2: ENL Proficiency  According to Fountas & Pinnell running records, 76% (48 out 63) of ENL students were reading at or above proficiency level by the end of the 2017-2018 school year.  According to I Ready Diagnostic Assessment, 45% (32 out of 68 ) of ENL students were reading at or above proficiency level by the end of 2016-2017 school year. English Language Learners & NYS State Exam Proficiency: Grades 3-5:  2017-18: 43% (26 out of 60)  2016-17:16% (9 out of 57)  27% increase in proficiency Special Population Consideration Student's With Disabilities (SWD) 5  SWD Population Percentage 2018-2019: 13% (122 : 940) SWD Population Percentage 2017-2018: 15% (139 :916) SWD Population Percentage 2016-2017 : 16% (148 :933) Kindergarten SWD Proficiency  According to Fountas & Pinnell running records, 71% (19 out 27) of SWD's are reading at or above reading level by the end of the 2017-2018 school year.  According to Fountas & Pinnell running records, 35% (9 out of 26) of SWD's are reading at or above reading level by the end of the 2016-17 school year. 1st Grade SWD Proficiency  According to Fountas & Pinnell running record, 69% (16 out of 23) of SWD's are reading at or above reading level by the end of the 2017-2018 school year.  According to Fountas & Pinnell running records, 63% (15 out of 24) of SWD's are reading at or above reading level by the end of the 2016-17 school year. 2nd Grade SWD Proficiency  According to Fountas & Pinnell running record, 82% (14 out of 27) of SWD's are reading at or above reading level by the end of the 2017-2018 school year.  According to Iready Diagnostic Assessment, 38% (10 out of 26) of SWD's are reading at or above reading level by the end of the 2016-17 school year. ELA Data for Students with Disabilities Grades 3-5 Special Education Students Scoring Proficiency on NYS ELA Exam  2017-18: 59% (32 out of 64)  2016-17: 23% (16 out of 69)  36% increase in proficiency As always it is our goal to provide a Supportive Learning Environment within which all students can learn as well as outreach to parents to assist them to best meet the needs of their children. Our instructional focus, derived from the Pillars and CIE, includes productive struggle and the development of strong academic language through self-awareness and student-to-student learning. Student engagement is evidenced in all content areas and within all disciplines and is part of the instructional core program. In addition, we strongly believe and focus on establishing a strong culture for learning and a positive and mutually respectful classroom environment, which is inherent in the belief that all students can be successful. 6  4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Progress in the Elements of the Framework As a school community we have a shared belief, that children learn best, through a self and peer directed model. This work has allowed children to work closely with their peers to foster interdependency for learning where students, not teachers take the central role. One practice grounded in self-learning we have found successful is the use of meta-cognitive strategies to better develop reading comprehension. We have been working with teachers on deepening student understanding of the internal cognitive strategies needed to comprehend text such as re-reading, questioning, inferring, synthesizing, etc. Teachers have been working with students to “track their thoughts” while reading. Teachers have attended multiple workshops on think alouds, coding thoughts and meta-cognitive strategies. This work has allowed students to set goals, track and monitor understanding and pay close attention to the strategies they chose to use while reading in order to analyze their thoughts and modify their patterns of thinking based on reflection and feedback. Teachers developed a repertoire of templates to allow students to record their thoughts while reading along with structures for self-reflection and peer assessment and feedback. Teachers began sharing strategies with each other and the work began to take off. Students exhibited a deep self-awareness of their responsibility to be active readers who constantly listen to their inner voice as a means to monitor their understanding of text. Research on Meta cognition, particularly in literacy and mathematics, makes a convincing case that instruction and support in the control and regulation of thinking processes can have a strong impact on achievement (Paris, Wasik, Turner, 1991). We are continuing to use this work across the disciplines. We are confident that by sharing this work with other schools, we can help increase student achievement for all. Another practice grounded in our student-centered model has been the application of student led questioning and discussion. We have done this work through the study of various discussion protocols such as the Socratic Seminar, fishbowls, debates, etc. We began this work with a technique we called open discussion, in which various pilot classes began using this routine. Students read a complex text, crafted their own questions for discussion. The students then led themselves through the discussion following various protocols such as listening to others, watching for body language, taking turns, building upon responses and citing text to support answers. We noticed students began to turn to one another for support and the discussion allowed them to scaffold themselves towards the intended understanding. The teacher when necessary was able to step in and use strategic questions to help guide the conversation and learning in the direction envisioned. As this work evolved, teachers began exploring other protocols such as Socratic seminar. Shortly there after what began as model classrooms became lab sites that enabled teachers to not only view best practices but also become an integrated part of the teaching and learning. This year we will continue our work in student led learning with an expanded focus on critical thinking in grades K-5. Specifically, we will be examining what it means to be a critical thinker and how to develop questions, success criteria, lessons and tasks that allow students to use their knowledge of content to make connections, analyze perspectives and justify explanations through valid, logical evidence. Professional Development will center in on approaches learned from LCI along with our work as part of the District Social studies and Critical Thinking Pilots. By continuing this work next year, we plan to deepen teacher understanding around the types of structures that promote a meta cognitive, student led model. Sharing these practices, we believe is best learned by teachers watching teachers implement theses structures and allowing teachers time to apply the techniques in their own classrooms with opportunities for teachers to communicate and observe one another to provide continued 7  support. It is important to note ongoing explicit professional development in response to the learning needs to be provided along the way and differentiated to meet the learning needs of all teachers. We believe in student led learning because it provides an opportunity for students to take ownership over learning for themselves and their peers. This is grounded in the theory of Meta-Cognition and Discovery Learning, in which students use their prior knowledge, experiences and understandings to make sense of new learning. Similarly, this idea of self directed learning promotes Rigorous Instruction, as it demands students to actively think about content to solve problems, make decisions and set goals. It requires students to be aware of their thinking at a deep level, become conscious of their inner voice and reflect upon how to improve their thinking patterns to achieve better results. Secondly, the effectiveness of these practices are contingent upon a school community with Effective School Leadership providing a Strong Supportive Environment and providing teachers ongoing opportunities to Collaborate. Administration is committed to providing teachers the tools, resources, professional development and time opportunities necessary to implement this work successfully. It is with mutual Trust and Respect that teachers and administrators are able to work together and take instructional risks to realize a shared vision of teaching and learning. As we believe in Strengthening Family and Community Ties and that learning is a communal partnership, we will ensure parents are provided the tools and the training to meet the unique needs of their children in regards to these practices. As always the parent coordinator will be an integral part of this initiative. Together, the parent coordinator, teachers, lab site specialists and administration will collaborate to plan out and provide opportunities for parents to learn and engage in this work. Rigorous Instruction: o Professional development across the grades in the areas of strategy instruction, student led learning, Meta cognition, writing, questioning and discussion, data driven instruction, critical thinking and math to increase student achievement. o Data driven instruction grounded in systematic assessment cycles inclusive of baseline and culminating assessments and Fountas & Pinnell running records and Iready in which teachers utilize baseline data to drive targeted small group guided instruction. o The use of 7-trait rubrics aligned to the common core writing standards with a content specific strand measuring our student's ability to think and write critically. This will enable teachers to provide students with targeted, actionable feedback in order to improve student outcomes in writing. o Across the grades, rigorous independent and collaborative tasks in literacy and math that promote Meta-cognition, student led learning and higher order thinking that are differentiated to meet the diverse needs of varying learners. o The expansion of Google Docs as a school wide platform for sharing resources and analyzing student data. o The revision of phonics instruction to meet the common core demands and ensure students can decode text accurately by the end of grade 1. o The use of various forms of instructional technology such as Newsela, myon, Imagine Learning, Iready, IXL and digital task cards to improve student achievement and promote 21 st century learning.  An increase use of activities to promote concrete, visual and abstract learning in order to gain an deeper knowledge of mathematical conceptual understanding. 8  Supportive Environment: o Deepening our understanding and use of Habits of Mind as an approach to create conscious, self-reflective learners and embed the life skills necessary for college and career success. o Curriculum maps created through the approach of backwards design that encompass the universal designs for learning model and provide multiple access and entry points for all learners through scaffold differentiation. o Friday enrichment clubs that allow students to participate in fields of study based on personal choice and interest level. o “The P.S. 253 Gazette”, collaboration between teachers and students resulting in monthly publications. o School to school collaboration through digital literacy clubs and peer basketball games. o The implementation of student discussion forums across classrooms to promote student autonomy and ownership over learning. Collaborative Teachers: o The creation of teacher teams to develop interdisciplinary units of study grounded in the content standards of science and social studies, embedded in the common core standards and citywide instructional shifts. o The use of inquiry team meetings to analyze data for individual and groups of students inclusive of ELL’s and SWD’s to modify instruction and track the progression of school wide goals. o An approach to “Balancing the Literacy” with a shared belief in using the workshop model as an effective approach to teaching and learning. o A reciprocal approach to inter-visitations that allows for teachers to observe one another and provide each other targeted feedback in a “risk free” capacity. Effective School Leadership: o Ongoing collaboration between administration and teachers through the use of monthly professional development committee meetings, professional development calendars and teacher surveys. o Monday/Tuesday professional development targeted to meet the needs of teachers based off of student data and teacher feedback. o Lead teachers that serve as both mentors and facilitators through planning /reflection sessions, professional development and inter-visitations 0 Providing targeted professional development via the coaching model Qtel /Fundations) 9  0 Providing teachers collegial prepared video supports to be reference for individualized teacher support and development Strong Family-Community Ties: o Continued opportunities for parents to engage in the school community through various discussion venues, A.M/P.M workshops and Saturday parent/student classes. o 99% completion and return of school surveys completed by parents for the 2017-2018 school year. o NWVA relationship with Student Council o A continued relationship with Grady High school providing opportunities for students to collaborate through holiday celebrations. o A continued relationship with the Shore front nursing home in which students participate in an 8 week service activity. This activity is model for and then enjoyed by the senior citizens Areas of Focus: We will continue to:  Deepen our understanding of critical thinking skills by revising Social Studies curriculum to incorporate more opportunities to explore primary sources and engage in collaborative critical thinking tasks. We will work to strengthen teachers in their competency to provide feedback to students that directly relates to their ability to think critically .We will also expand this focus for the upcoming school year to K-2. Increase reading and language proficiency in ENL learners through targeted professional development provided by Q-TEL and the revamping of curriculum for ENL learners K-5 based on data from in house assessments, with a specific focus on the modality of writing.   Develop student centered classrooms that promote student lead discussion and meta-cognition through the use of discussion protocols, student led learning models, student collaborative learning, coding your thoughts and self-awareness and self-regulation activities.  Continuing to develop teacher skills in the area of 1a: Knowledge of Content & Pedagogy. This year we will continue our work in building our understanding of content with a specific focus on math and social studies. We will also be focusing in on developing the importance of clarity, explicitness, repetition, and how to develop strong tools and tasks to support student learning.  Deepen our understanding of best practices in math with a deep focus on fostering conceptual  understanding and effective teaching practices in math K-5. We will also begin to building an understanding of the Next Generation standards in math and how we can tie those standards into our pre-existing math curriculum. To assist us in this work we will be working with Generation Ready. Foster Social emotional awareness within our school community. We will focus in on building student centered environments were students feel secure and comfortable speaking freely to teachers about their personal challenges and concerns. As well as work with teachers on how to address, advice and speak to students in regards to their personal struggles. Finally we will also continue to develop productive life-long habits and skills through the use of Habits of Mind. 0  1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 21K253 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 921 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 71 69 15 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 1 N/A 23 27 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 83.0% % Attendance Rate 82.1% % Reduced Lunch 21.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.9% 36.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 24.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 15.1 0% 12% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 71.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 97% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 91 91 93.8% 0.1% 15.6% 0.3% 37.9% 1.3% 6 1% 6 82.4% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School Strengths Principal Performance Review 2017-18 Indicators rated “effective” or “highly effective” (1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 2.2, 3.1, 3.4, 4.1, 4.2, 5.1)  Principal Speroni, no doubt you continue to be a highly effective leader, most notably in the area of teaching and learning. During our walk-through of the building we visited several classrooms that evidenced your high expectations of instruction. Students were engaged in rigorous tasks that allowed for critical thinking, development of independent ideas and are promoting the development of skills that align not only to the Common Core Learning Standards, but to the expectations of the upcoming Next Generation Learning Standards. As a skilled instructional leader you are keenly aware of the achievement data, both summarily and in real time which allows you to evaluate the pedagogic choices your teachers are making during daily instruction in relation to the needs of the students in their individual classrooms. It also allows for thoughtful, effective organizational decisions that align to the over-arching school goals you formulated for this school year. You expert knowledge of curriculum and instruction allows for critical feedback to teachers and the development of a professional learning plan that ensures that teachers are supported in reaching expectations. You work diligently with your assistant principals to norm the understanding of the Danielson Framework for Teaching and have systems and structures in place to supervise the performance of assistant principals to ensure that the evaluation of teacher practice is in alignment to Danielson rubric so that the improvement of instruction is continuous. Overall Findings for 2017-18 School Year ELA: Increase in 21% in the number of students scoring at or above proficiency levels. Math: Increase of 20% in the number of students scoring at or above proficiency levels PRIORITY NEEDS 3  SCHOOL WIDE DATA MATH GRADES 3-5  2017-18: 82% (350 out of 425) scoring levels 3 & 4  2016-17: 62% (259 out of 415) scoring levels 3 & 4  Findings: 20% increase in overall proficiency Findings: 39% decrease in number of students scoring a level 1  2017-18: 4% (19 out of 425) scoring level 1/ 2016-17: 12% (49 out of 415) scoring level 1   2017-18: 13% (56 out of 425) scoring level 2/ 2016-17: 26% (107 out of 415) scoring level 2   Overall Findings: 18% (75 out of 425) of students are scoring below proficiency. Findings: 13% decrease in the number of students scoring a level 2 STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES (SWD)  2017-18: 70% (45 out of 64) scoring levels 3 & 4  2016-17: 50% (36 out of 72) scoring levels 3 & 4  Findings: 20% increase in proficiency  2017-18: 9% (6 out of 64) scoring level 1/ 2016-17: 10% (7 out of 72) scoring level 1  2017-18: 20% (13 out of 64) scoring level 2/2016-17: 40% (29 out of 72) scoring level 2  Findings: 30% (19 out of 64) of our special education students are scoring below proficiency ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS (ENL)  2017-18: 66% (45 out of 68)  2016-17: 44% (27 out of 62) scoring levels 3 & 4  Findings: 22% increase in proficiency  2017-18: 11% (8 out of 70) scoring level 1/ 2016-17: 26% (16 out of 62) scoring level 1  2017-18: 21% (15 out of 70) scoring level 2: 2016-17: 31% (19 out of 62) scoring level 2  Findings: 33% (23 out of 70) of our ENL students are scoring below proficiency AREAS OF FOCUS  Work with our ENL teachers and students to design instruction and tools to support ENL students in understanding math vocabulary and breaking down word problems  Work with teachers to target our students scoring below proficiency inclusive of our SWD population by building more opportunities for deeper conceptual understanding around topics being taught in math 4  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. CEP 2018-2019 Goal 1 (Rigorous Instruction): By June 2019, 75% of students(32:43) grades 3-5 inclusive of ELL's and SWD's scoring between proficiency ratings 2.6-3.2 and will increase their score level at least 1 tenth of a point on the NYS Math exam. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 1. Research-based instructional Programs, professional development and/or systems and structures needed to impact change.  Targeted professional development in grades K-5 focusing on building conceptual understanding in math concepts provided by Generation Ready.  The roll out of the 2018-2019 Next Generation Math State Standards. Revision of curriculum to better align with the Next Generation Math Standards.  The incorporation of systems and structures targeting remedial work in math around pre-requisite grade level skills students are not proficient as part of daily instruction and homework.  The use of modified word problem solving organizer as a tool to scaffold students in breaking down word problems focusing in on using multiple approaches to solving word problems  A focus in on improving student ability to communicate in writing their approaches to solving problems through daily writing activities inclusive of success criteria and self assessment tools to support students in this work.  The incorporation of a "math resource folder" in grades 3-5 for every student with tools to support students in math concepts and problem solving.  A focus in on the 8 effective teaching practices in math referred to in Principals to Action.  The incorporation of systems and structures focusing in on developing math vocabulary with a focus on tier 2 math verbs and nouns.  Revamping of the math block to include more time dedicated to active engagement, collaborative problems solving and using manipulatives  The incorporation of ten minute math "number talks" Monday-Thursday in K-5.  Monthly professional development committee meetings in consultation with the principal to provide Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Students Administration All Teaching Staff Mid-Year Progress check Feb. 2018 Fall (November) & Spring (April) Math Benchmarks Iready Progress Monitoring Sept, Jan, May Go Math Chapter Exams 6  administration with specific feedback that informs the next steps for professional development.  An effective after school program in the areas of ELA and Math with targeted subgroup inclusive of lowest performing third, ELL's and students close to proficiency (levels 2.6-3.2)  A Saturday program designed to provide enrichment and service opportunities for students in grades 4 and 5 inclusive of ELL’s and SWD’s 2. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups. All Students Sept 2018- June 2019 Administration All Teaching Staff  Departmentalized math for 2 periods in a smaller group setting with students in 3-5 struggling in mathematics.  The incorporation of bilingual resources to support  students in ICT classrooms will continue to have two Smart boards and increase the use of technology (the addition of Ipads and Laptops) to support parallel and alternative models for instruction and the use of technology to drive instruction and assessment.  Continue to use on-going cycles of inquiry driven in analyzing data and looking at student work for specific subgroups of students, resulting in differentiated instruction targeted to meet the individual needs of learners.  Data meetings held by administration both by grade and individual teacher to monitor the progress for groups of students  The continued use of Universal Designs for learning to provide multiple entry and access points for all learners.  Continued opportunities for Para-professionals to engage in professional development to support classroom instruction.  We will continue utilize data to flex at risk instructional ELA and Math groups where applicable. 3. Engaging families and supporting their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core in order to support their children at home. All Students Sept 2018- June 2019 Administration All Teaching Staff Parent Coordinator 7 ● Utilizing Tuesday, parent engagement time to meet with parents to discuss the progress and needs of their children. ● Monthly newsletters for parents from teachers keeping them up to date on what their children are learning. ● Frequent updates to the school website and class pages providing parents with information and resources regarding the curriculum. ● Differentiated parent workshops to meet the specific needs of parents that align to the needs of their individual children. ● Providing parents literacy tool kits (vocabulary cards, workbooks, and magnetic letters) to use with children at home. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Throughout the school year parents will be provided workshops (with translators) and Q and A sessions which will enable them to be exposed to what is meant by rigorous instruction(content specific) ,ask questions,identify area of concern and work with trained school staff(Including but not limited to Teacher's Ass't principals,Principal,Parent coordinator) to best meet their child's needs at home. In addition,during parent engagement monthly parent sessions with their child's teacher will enable them to put their learning to practice with their children Dates will be determined in September in consultation with the PTA /SLT team. Time line: 9/2018-6/2019 Oversight: Principal, Parent Coordinator Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources Needed:  Adjustments to scheduling to provide collaborative planning time for teachers across a grade and maximize pull out opportunities for our most at risk students.  The purchase of test sophistication materials including, Rally, NY Ready, Coach Performance and Finish Line.  The re-purchase of Iready, Myon, Exemplars and IXL to support instructional technology.  The purchase of guided reading materials in fiction, non-fiction and the content areas.  The purchase of additional laptops and I pads to support the use of instructional technology.  Title lll after school program/materials Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A 8  X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Inquiry cycles analyzing math chapter exam scores will be conducted every 8 weeks (October 2018, December 2018, February 2019). This information will be used to identify targeted areas of focus and next steps for subgroups of students. Iready Math will be conducted 3 times a year in grades 2-5 (September 2018, January 2019, May 2019) to measure students proficiency in each domain of math. A 2 Day Math Benchmark assessment that mimics the NY State Exam will be administered in the fall (November 2018) and spring (March 2019), to measure and track progress and proficiency from fall to spring and from year to year. A data tracking sheet will be completed by class and grade to assess progress towards meeting the above goal. The use of Iready online reading diagnostic (3 times a year: September 2018 January 2019, May 2019) to assess student growth in phonics, vocabulary, comprehension of literature and comprehension of non-fiction grades 2 through 5. Progress and proficiency will be measured by class, subgroup and grade for each assessment cycle. The administrative inquiry team will review teacher submitted data and will provide feedback and next steps to grades/teacher times. These meetings will be held three times a year (September 2018 January 2019, May 2019) Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.)  Grades 3-5 Fall and Spring Math Benchmark Data (2 Day assessment with multiple choice, short response and extended response questions) Iready 2-5 Math   Chapter Exams 9  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? ELA Performance Data for Limited English Proficient Learners Kindergarten ENL Proficiency ● According to Fountas & Pinnell running records, 51% (32 out of 62) of ENL students were reading at or above proficiency level by the end of 2016-2017 school year. ● According to Fountas & Pinnell running records, 40% (27 out of 67) of ENL students were reading at or above proficiency level by the end of 2015-2016 school year. Grade 1 ENL Proficiency ● According to Fountas & Pinnell running records, 56% (37 out of 66) of ENL students were reading at or above proficiency level by the end of 2016-2017 school year. ● According to Fountas & Pinnell running records, 60% (39 out of 65) of ENL students were reading at or above proficiency level by the end of 2015-2016 school year. Grade 2 ENL Proficiency ● According to Fountas & Pinnell running records, 45% (29 out of 62) of ENL students were reading at or above proficiency level by the end of 2016-2017 school year. ● According to Fountas & Pinnell running records, 81% (46 out of 57) of ENL students were reading at or above proficiency level by the end of 2015-2016 school year. English Language Learners & NYS State Exam Proficiency Grades 3-5:  2017-18: 43% (26 out of 60)  2016-17: 16% (9 out of 57) 1  We demonstrated a 27% increase in proficiency for our ENL students We saw increased levels of proficiency in grades K and 1, with a decrease in proficiency in grade 2. It is important to note that we created our 2017-2018 goals based on the Fountas & Pinnell data trends from 2016-2017 . In an effort to more closely align grade 2 with grades 3-5 assessments we changed our assessment tool from Fountas and Pinnell Running Records to I ready, a rigorous multi-dimensional assessment tool that better aligns to the expectations of state exams. This resulted in a slight decrease from our projected target. Grade 2 teacher teams will be provided with professional learning opportunities including inter visitation ,model lessons and mentoring in order to deepen their understanding of data revealed reading strands and the alignment to their instructional next steps and student IEP's. ENL End of Year Data (In House Benchmark) K-5 Data  2017-18: 174 ENL students K-5 took the ENL assessment. 86% (150 out of 174) of the students made at least a .5 increase in proficiency from the baseline to the culminating exam.  2016-17: 200 ENL students K-5 took the ENL assessment. 65.5% (131 out of 200 students) of the students made at least a .5 increase in score from the baseline to the culminating exam.  There was a 20% gain in the number of students making at least .5% progress from the 2016-17 school year to the 2017-18 school year. We surpassed out school-wide goal of 70% Kindergarten  2017-18: 72% (31 out of 43) of the students made at least a .5 increase in proficiency from the baseline to the culminating exam.  2016-17: 73% (38 out of 52) of ENL kindergarten students increased at least .5 level from B/MOY to EOY. Grade 1  2017-18: 100% (28 out of 28) of the students made at least a .5 increase in proficiency from the baseline to the culminating exam.  2016-17: 59 % (29 out of 49 of) first grade ENL students increased at least .5 level from the MOY assessment to the EOY assessment. Grade 2  2017-18: 83% (34 out of 41 students) made a gain of at least 5 tenths increase in proficiency.  2016-17: 31% (14 out of 45) of Grade 2 ENL students increased at least .5 level from the MOY assessment to the EOY assessment. Grade 3  2017-18: 90% (29 out of 32 students) made a gain of at least 5 tenths increase in proficiency.  2016-17: 92 % (24 out of 26) of Grade 3 ENL students increased at least .5 level from the BOY assessment to the EOY assessment. 2  Grade 4  2017-18: 89% (17 out of 19 students) made a gain of at least 5 tenths increase in proficiency.  2016-17: 100% (13 out of 13) of Grade 4 ENL students increased at least .5 level from the BOY assessment to the EOY assessment. Grade 5  2017-18: 83% (9 out of 11 students) made a gain of at least 5 tenths increase in proficiency  2016-17: 86% (13 out of 15) of Grade 5 ENL students increased at least .5 level from the BOY assessment to the EOY assessment. Priority Need for ELL Students: According to the in house data we met our goal, with of ENL students making the necessary gains from the baseline to culminating. According to the data the ENL students are continuing to struggle in writing. Next year we will target our work in this modality with our ENL staff and students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound.  Goal 2 (Supportive Environment) By June 2019, 75% of ENL student K-5(144:192) will score at or above proficiency on the writing modality portion of the end of year in house ENL benchmark assessment. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 1. Research-based instructional Programs, professional development and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. All Students Sept 2018- June 2019 All teaching staff Administration ENL Data Analysis October, February and June ● The continuation digital progress monitoring through the school wide platform of Google Docs, to track the progress of our ENL's at for each modality (reading, writing, listening, speaking) . ● Provide opportunities for ENL teachers to work closely and collaboratively with classroom teachers by providing common planning periods ● Professional development focusing in on writing for our ENL learners with ENL staff and classroom teachers. ● Extended response practice every other week with differentiated language scaffolds for ENL students grades 3-5 starting in October. ● The creation of writing practice and process piece tasks for entering/emerging ENL students who are newly arrived to the country utilizing the 4 square model. ● The creation of a folder entitled "Beginner ENL resources" and "Practice Writing Tasks" where teachers can develop and share materials with one another. ● The creation of writing rubrics, checklists and support tools to assist ENL students in writing coherent developed paragraphs. ● An effective after school program in the areas of ELA and Math for ENL's. 4  ● A Saturday program designed to provide enrichment and service opportunities for students in grades 4 and 5 inclusive of ENL’s and SWD’s -The use of Fundations phonics program to support ENL students in decoding and encoding phonetically K-5 -ENL staff will provide professional development in the areas of instructional strategies to best support and scaffold ENL learners. Specific attention will be paid to those teachers requiring mandated hours. 2. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups. All Students Sept. 2018 All Teaching Staff to June 2019 Administration ● Increase in the arsenal of guided reading materials for ENL learners. ● The continued use of Ipad apps to build language skills (translated dictionaries, Brainpop ENL) ● Increase the arsenal of RTI resources to include the following, Focused on Reading, IXL, Iready, and Intensive Phonics Instruction (Fundations) and Myon in grades 3-5. ● ICT will continue to have two Smart boards and increase the use of technology (the addition of Ipads and Laptops) to support parallel and alternative models for instruction. ● On-going cycles of inquiry driven in analyzing data and looking at student work for specific subgroups of students, resulting in differentiated instruction targeted to meet the individual needs of targeted ENL learners. ● Data meetings held by administration both by grade and individual teacher to monitor the progress for groups of ENL and Special Education students ● The continued use of Universal Designs for learning to provide multiple entry and access points for all learners. ● Continued opportunities for Para-professionals to engage in professional development to support classroom instruction for ENL learners. -Strategic pull out groups to support entering and emerging ENL students in phonics and language instruction 5 All Students Sept 2018-June 2019 All Teaching Staff Administration Parent Coordinator -The continued use of QUAD classrooms, allowing for ENL and AIS teachers to push into ENL/ICT classrooms during the guided reading block to support small group instruction. 3.Engaging families and supporting their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support their children at home. ● Utilizing Tuesday, parent engagement time to meet with parents to discuss the progress and needs of their children. ● Monthly newsletters for parents from teachers keeping them up to date on what their children are learning. ● Frequent updates to the school website and class pages providing parents with information and resources regarding the curriculum. ● A list of websites and resources for ENL students to use at home with parents. ● Differentiated parent workshops to meet the specific needs of parents that align to the needs of their individual children. ● Providing parents literacy tool kits (vocabulary cards, workbooks, magnetic letters) to use with children at home. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Throughout the school year parents will be provided workshops (with translators) and Q and A sessions which will enable them to be exposed to what is meant by Supportive Environment they will ,ask questions,identify area of concern and work with trained school staff(Including but not limited to :Social Worker ,Parent Coordinator.Psychologist and Guidance counselor,A.P,Principal and Parent leaders) to best meet their child's needs at home. In addition,parent engagement monthly parent sessions with their child's teacher will enable them to put their learning to practice with their children. Dates will be determined in September in consultation with the PTA /SLT team. Timeline:9/17-6/18 Oversight:Principal,Parent Coordinator Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources Needed: 6  ● Adjustments to scheduling to provide collaborative planning time for teachers across a grade. ● Adjustments to scheduling to provide opportunities for ENL staff to push into classroom during the the literacy block. ● The purchase of literacy materials materials including, Focused in Reading Rally, NY Ready, Coach Performance and Finish Line and Target Reading Instruction. ● The re-purchase of Iready, Newsela Myon, Discovery Education, IXL and Imagine learning to support instructional technology and assessment. ● The purchase of guided reading materials designed for ENL learners in fiction, non-fiction and the content areas. ● The purchase of additional laptops to support the use of instructional technology. ● The purchase of Ipad Apps to support ENL learners. ● Title lll after school program/materials Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● ENL in house assessments that mimic the NYSESLAT will be conducted three times a year (October 2018, January 2019, June 2019 )Progress will be tracked on a data excel sheet through a shared platform on Google Drive.  Inquiry cycles will be conducted for every unit of study every 6 weeks (October 2018, December 2018, February 2019) to assess the progress of ENL students from the baseline to the culminating assessment in writing. Progress and proficiency will be measured by percentage class and grade for each assessment cycle. The data will be used to inform instruction for the following unit of study. ● Fountas and Pinnell running record assessments will be conducted 4 times a year (K-1) (October 2018, January 2019, March 2019, June 2019) and Iready will be conducted 3 times a year in grades 2-5 (September 2018, January 2019, May 2019). Progress and proficiency will be measured by class, subgroup and grade for each assessment cycle. ● ELA benchmark assessments will be administered in the fall (November 2018) and spring (March 2019), to measure and track progress and proficiency of ENL students. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 7   ENL "In House" Benchmark (Assessment to mimic the NYSESLAT) given 3 times a year to all ENL students Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Student End of the Year Assessment Data for K-2 in Math Kindergarten: 93% of all Kindergarten students are performing on or above grade level in Math Grade 1: 72% of all Grade 1 students are performing on or above grade level in Math Grade 2: 80% of all Grade 2 students are performing on or above grade level in Math Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal 3 (K-2 Teachers) By June 2019, 75% of students in grades K-2 (348:465)will score at or above proficiency in math as evidenced by an end of year benchmark exam. 9 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Students Sept 2018 June 2019 Administration All Teaching Staff Mid-Year Progress Check Feb. 2019 Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 1. Research-based instructional Programs, professional development and/or systems and structures needed to impact change.  Targeted professional development in grades K-2 focusing on building conceptual understanding in math concepts provided by Generation Ready  Targeted professional development and grade specific planning sessions to focus on rolling out the new Next Generation Standards and modifying the math curriculum and assessments to reflect the new standards.  Revise end of year assessment to be reflective of the Next Generation Standards and word problems  Provide teacher support through a Math Coach from Generation Ready whom utilization varies coaching models. Incorporation of systems and structures targeting students requiring remedial work in math around pre requisite grade level skills   The use of modified word problem solving graphic   organizers utilized as a scaffolding tool to assist students in breaking down word problems by using multiple approaches in solving word problems. Incorporation of a math resource folder in grades K-2 for every student with tools to support students in math concepts and problem solving. Increase the use of math graphic organizers (KWC and 3 read) and discrete reading strategies that allow students to deconstruct and understand complex math word problems.  A targeted focus on the "8 Effective Mathematical Teaching Practices."  The incorporation of systems and structures focusing on developing math vocabulary. 0  Revamping of the math block to include more time dedicated to active engagement, collaborative problem solving and using mathematical manipulatives  The incorporation of daily 10 minute math "Number Talks."  Monthly professional development committee meetings in consultation with the principal to provide administration with specific feedback that informs the next steps for professional development 2. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups. All Students Sept 2018 – Administration June 2019 All Teaching Staff ● Increase the arsenal of RTI resources to include the following Iready and Ready in grades K-5. ● ICT classrooms will continue to have two Smart boards and increase the use of technology (the addition of Ipads and Laptops) to support team teaching by utilizing the parallel and alternative ICT models for instruction. ● On-going cycles of inquiry driven in analyzing data and looking at student work for specific subgroups of students, resulting in differentiated instruction targeted to meet the individual needs of learners. ● Data meetings held by administration both by grade and individual teacher to monitor the progress for groups of students ● The continued use of Universal Designs for learning to provide multiple entry and access points for all learners. ● Continued opportunities for Para-professionals to engage in professional development to support classroom instruction. ● The continued use of guided math groups as a means to scaffold students in demonstrating an understanding and use of mathematical concepts and problem solving on their grade level. 6-8 week cycle check points Beg, middle, end of the year check points and as needed 3. Strategies to promote teacher-parent collaborations to improve student achievement. All Students Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration All Teaching Staff Parent Coordinator 1 ● Utilizing Tuesday, parent engagement time to meet with parents to discuss the progress and needs of their children. ● Monthly newsletters for parents from teachers keeping them up to date on what their children are learning. ● Frequent updates to the school website and class pages providing parents with information and resources regarding the curriculum. ● Differentiated parent workshops to meet the specific needs of parents that align to the needs of their individual children with a specific focus on our newly arriving immigrant families, ENL and SWD's. ● Provide differentiated Parent workshops to support gaining a deeper understanding of how to use conceptual understanding to solve mathematical concepts and problem solving. In addition, provide opportunities to use manipulatives during hands on activities as a take away for parents so along side with their child or children. -Providing parents with resources along with professional development on how to use a variety of instructional resources to support learning at home. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Throughout the school year parents will be provided workshops (with translators) and Q and A sessions which will enable them to be exposed to a deeper understanding of opportunities that foster Collaboration between Parent and Teachers. They will be able to ask questions,identify area of concern and work with trained school staff(Including but not limited to :Social Worker ,Parent Coordinator.Psychologist and Guidance counselor,A.P,Principal and Parent leaders) to best meet their child's needs at home. In addition,during parent engagement monthly parent sessions with their child's teacher will enable them to work as a team and put their learning to practice with their children. Dates will be determined in September in consultation with the PTA /SLT team. Time line:9/17-6/18 Oversight:Principal,Parent Coordinator Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources Needed: ● Adjustments to scheduling to provide collaborative planning time for teachers across a grade. 2  ● Adjustments to scheduling to provide opportunities for ENL staff to push into classroom during the literacy block. ● The purchase of test sophistication materials including, Rally, NY Ready, Coach Performance and Finish Line. ● The re-purchase of Iready, Myon, Discovery Education, IXL and Imagine learning to support instructional technology. ● The purchase of guided reading materials designed for ENL learners in fiction, non-fiction and the content areas. - The purchase of guided reading materials designed to meet the needs of students on all stages of reading specifically for Emergent and Early readers. - The purchase of multi-level guided reading and read aloud books that builds knowledge of Social Studies Content through reading and listening comprehension. -The purchase of additional tactile instructional materials to better engage and provide visual stimulation of all students specifically SWD's and ENL students. ● The purchase of additional laptops to support the use of instructional technology. ● The purchase of Ipad Apps to support SWD/ENL learners. ● Title lll after school program/materials Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● Fountas and Pinnell running record assessments will be conducted 4 times a year (K-1) (October 2018, January 2019, March 2019, May 2019). and Iready assessments 3 times a year in grade 2-5 (September 2018, January 2019, May 2019) . Progress and proficiency will be measured by class, subgroup and grade for each assessment cycle. This data will be used to create AIS programming and modify instruction and curriculum for the following cycle.  Anchor Comprehension assessments will be administered to grades K-1, 3 times a year (September,  December, May) to assess skill comprehension in Fiction/Non-fiction. The data from the these exams will be tracked for progress, proficiency and next steps. Ready Common Core Skill based assessments will be administered through a baseline and culminating exam for each domain of study every 6 weeks. The data from these exams will be tracked for progress, proficiency and next steps. ● The administrative inquiry team will review teacher submitted data and will provide feedback and next steps to grades/teacher times. These meetings will be held three times a year (September 2018, January 2019, May 2019) -PreK will use the Work Sampling System which is a curriculum-embedded authentic performance assessment tool used to collect and analyze student data on the following 7 domains: Personal & Social Development, Language & 3  Literacy, Mathematical Thinking, Scientific Thinking, Social Studies, The Arts and Physical Development, Health and Safety. Students' performance will be measured three times a year December, March and June. At that time each strand within each domain will analyzed to identify if the student met, did not meet, or in the progress of meeting the expectation for the Common Core Standard aligned with each domain. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Fountas & PInnell Running Records (K-1) Iready Diagnostic & Instruction Online Program (2-5)    Anchor Comprehension Assessments (K-1)  Ready Baseline & Culminating Assessments (2)  Pre-K Work Sampling System Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Evidence/Supporting Data: Comparing K-2 F&P end of year data between 2016-2017 & 2017-2018 Kindergarten: 2016-2017 2017-2018 Findings Target 70% Target 70% 66% (All students) 83% (All students) 17% increase 36% (Sp ed) 28% increase 18% increase 53% (ENL) 64% (Sp ed) 71% (ENL) Grade 1 2016-2017 2017-2018 Findings Target 80% Target 80% 74% (All Students) 81% (All students) 7% increase 65% (Sp ed) 1% increase 10% increase 59% (ENL) 66% (Sp ed) 69 %(ENL) Grade 2 2016-2017 2017-2018 Target 83% 62% (All Students) 84% (All students) 22% increase Target 83% Findings 5 59% (Sp ed) 62% (ENL) 76% (Sp ed) 82% (ENL) 17% increase 20% increase Although, their has been a significant increase in reading proficiency in grades K-2, as evidenced by the student’s running records, students need to increase their scores on answering “About/Beyond the Text” critical thinking questions. Their will be an additional component added to the Analyzing F & P data documents. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal 4: By June of 2019, 75% of K-1 students(231:309) will score a level 3 on the "About/Beyond the Text" component of the End of Year Fountas & Pinnell Running Record Benchmark Assessment and 65% of students in grades 2-5(448:597),inclusive of ENL and SWD's will demonstrate improvement in their ability to think critically in the content area of Social Studies as measured by performance on the critical thinking sub strand trait on task specific rubrics 6 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teaching Staff Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration All Teaching Staff Mid-Year Progress Check Feb. 2019 Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). -Professional development in the area of critical thinking inclusive of critical thinking frameworks for curriculum and instruction, crafting questions and designing critical thinking tasks. - The revision of writing tasks to incorporate a critical thinking component in the content area to unit writing pieces to provide opportunities to assess student understanding of how to use content knowledge to make connections and form logical and reasonable conclusions providing valid evidence to support claims. -The addition of a critical thinking in the content areas component to task specific rubrics to track progress of students in critical thinking -The revision of Social Studies curriculum grades K-5 to better align and integrate NYS social studies standards with literacy curriculum -Professional development utilizing resources from the Passport curriculum. -Specific feedback during post-observations in the area of 1a: Knowledge of Content and Pedagogy in the fostering of critical thinking skills 7  -Inter-visitations allowing teachers to observe one another and share best practices in the area of social studies and critical thinking. -The incorporation of collaborative Fridays, allowing students to use student led hands on learning embedded in content and skills to increase engagement and peer learning such as image analysis, touch artifacts, critical thinking collaborative group projects, etc. -Professional development on how to use meta-cognitive structures within all subject areas for both teachers and students to track understanding and learning with an emphasis on planning, monitoring, reflecting and evaluating learning. -The use of Google Drive to track progress in critical thinking. -A focus in on developing critical thinkers by teaching students how to look at multiple perspectives/approaches, solve problems, gather information before making decisions 2. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups. All Teaching Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration Staff All Teaching Staff ● Differentiated scaffoldsto support students in understanding difficult content inclusive of visuals and touch objects. Inclusive of differentiated text to support the needs of struggling readers allowing for multiple access and entry points for all learners. ● ENL and AIS will support content specific themes to build schema and background knowledge for ENL and Struggling learners. ● On-going cycles of inquiry driven in analyzing data and looking at student work for specific subgroups of students, resulting in differentiated instruction targeted to meet the individual needs of learners in Math and ELA. 8  ● Data meetings held by administration both by grade and individual teacher to monitor the progress for groups of students ● The continued use of Universal Designs for learning to provide multiple entry and access points for all learners. ● Continued opportunities for Para-professionals to engage in professional development to support classroom instruction. . 3. Strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement as a key lever for school improvement. All teaching Staff Sept 2018 June 2019 Administration All Teaching Staff ● Provide parents information about the Social Studies and Science content their children will be learning at home. ● Utilizing Tuesday, parent engagement time to meet with parents to discuss the progress and needs of their children. ● Monthly newsletters for parents from teachers keeping them up to date on what their children are learning. ● Frequent updates to the school website and class pages providing parents with information and resources regarding the curriculum. ● Differentiated parent workshops to meet the specific needs of parents that align to the needs of their individual children. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be provided opportunities throughout the school year to volunteer and collaborate with the PTA and members of the SLT in an effort to encourage the emergence pf Parent leaders within the community .Workshops hosted by the Parent Coordinator and supported by trained staff inclusive of the Principal.A.P.'s Teacher leaders ,Guidance Counselors,and the Social worker will inform , clarify and encourage parents to foster a deeper relationship with the school community as partners in the work around meeting the needs of their children . Dates will be determined in September in consultation with the PTA /SLT team. Timeline:9/2018-6/2019 Oversight:Principal,Parent Coordinator Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 9  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources Needed: ● The purchase of Richard Bluttal for professional development services ● Adjustments to scheduling to provide collaborative planning time for teachers across a grade. ● Adjustments to scheduling to provide opportunities for ENL staff to push into classroom during the literacy block. ● The purchase of test sophistication materials including, Rally NY Ready, Coach Performance and Finish Line. ● The re-purchase of Iready, Myon, Newsela and IXL to support instructional technology. ● The purchase of guided reading materials designed differentiated learners in fiction, non-fiction and the content areas. The purchase of additional content driven literature. ● The purchase of additional laptops and Ipads to support the use of instructional technology. ● The purchase of Ipad Apps to support differentiated learners. ● Title lll afterschool program/materials -Participation in LCI learning groups Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● The tracking of student progress in critical thinking abilities every 6 weeks (October 2018, December 2018. February 2019 and May 2019) as evidenced by scores on the critical thinking sub strand of content-writing specific performance assessments.  Three cycles of administrative inquiry (September 2018, December 2018, May 2019) will take place in which the administrative team will analyze teacher ratings in the areas of 3c and use the data to modify professional development plans. ● Inquiry cycles will be conducted for every unit of study (6 weeks) to assess progress in reading and writing skills from baseline to culminating . Progress and proficiency will be measured by class and grade for each assessment cycle. The data will be used to inform instruction for the following unit of study as well as modify professional development plans.  The administrative inquiry team will review teacher submitted data and will provide feedback and next steps to grades/teacher times. These meetings will be held three times a year (September 2018 January 2019, May 2019) 0   Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Iready Diagnostic & Instruction Online Program (2-5)   Grade Created Baseline and Culminating Exams (3-5)  Coach Performance ELA Benchmark Assessments (3-5)  Advance Data Tracker (K-5)  Critical Thinking Questions and aligned rubrics (3-5) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Principal Performance Review 2017-18  You have created a trusting, nurturing, and supportive environment for students, faculty and families. Principal Speroni, you understand deeply and value greatly the importance of the social-emotional well-being if students are to succeed academically. Ensuring the social-emotional well- being of your students is a priority for you and you are succeeding in deepening the understanding of the importance of social-emotional intelligence for students, staff and parents. To support this work you have implemented the following:  Habits of Minds: This year in grades K-2 the “book of the month” has been embedded in social-emotional topics connected to the habits of mind. These habits are tasks students complete to connect the habits to themselves and the text. In grades 3-5 Habits of Mind tasks have been re-designed to be more self-reflective. These tasks allow students to assess their use of habits pre and post learning and think critically about how the use of these habits impact their lives both short and long term. 2017-2018-NYC School Survey Report Data Pending Embargo Lift 2017-2018 Movement Towards the Least Restrictive Environment: Students Declassified From Speech Therapy Services: 12 students declassified from Speech Services Students Receiving Speech Therapy Services Moving Towards the Least Restrictive Environment 19 students were moved into a least restrictive environment Students Receiving Occupational Therapy Services: 16 students have reduced services and 9 students were discharged Students Receiving Physical Therapy Services: 4 students were declassified from services and 1 student reduced services Students Receiving Counseling Services: 2  4 students reduced Counseling Services Students Declassified from Special Education Services: 10 students declassified Currently 39 students in grades 3-5 receive mandated counseling services. Our goal is to reduce the amount of students receiving mandated counseling services in grades 3-5 by at least 33% which is (13 out of 39) students either through a reduction of services, increase in group size, decrease in Counseling sessions or declassification from services in its entirety. Currently, The School Social Worker, School Guidance Counselor and the School Psychologist provide mandated counseling services. In engaging in monthly SIT meetings and weekly internal special education meetings, students’ annual counseling goals will be reviewed and analyzed. If mastery of annual goals are determined, there will be movement towards the least restrictive environment for those specific students who have evidenced such mastery. Utilizing specific strategies and supports coupled with professional development opportunities for both staff, as well as parents will foster a growth in social emotional well being resulting in the mastery and or progress of mandated counseling goals . Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal #5: By June 2019, 40% (16 : 39) IEP driven students in grades 3-5 will reduce their mandated counseling services. This will be evidenced by an increase in group size, a decrease in service sessions and or a declassification from mandated Counseling services. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 1. Research-based instructional programs , professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change  Mandated counseling students' individualized IEP goals will be analyzed and monitored to determine mastery. This will take place during every Annual Review/Triennial Review and February mid year progress check, monthly SIT meetings and weekly internal special education meetings.  The School Psychologist, Guidance Counselor, and Social Worker will collaborate with classroom teachers to craft lessons and daily opportunities for socialization to aid in mastery of specific social emotional goals as indicated on students’ Individualized Education Plans.  The Assistant Principal of Special Education, School Psychologist, Guidance Counselor and or Social Worker will provide professional development opportunities to paraprofessionals to assist and provide strategies to support students receiving mandated counseling services  The Assistant Principal of Special Education and/or School Psychologist will provide professional development opportunities to staff teachers/clusters/ related service providers on specific behavioral methodologies utilized in working with students on the spectrum  The School Psychologist/Guidance Counselor and or Social Worker will incorporate play therapy, art therapy, and music therapy during their mandated counseling sessions to assist students in expressing their feelings, thoughts and working through daily struggles  The School Psychologist,Guidance Counselor and or Social Worker will utilize social stories, role playing IEP driven mandated students receiving mandated counseling services in grades 3-5 Administration School Psychologist, School Social Worker School Guidance Counselor IEP Teacher Classroom teachers Related service providers Sept 2018- June 2019 Sept 2018- June 2019  Every Annual Review, Triennial EPC meeting  Weekly Internal Special Education Meetings  Monthly SIT Meetings  Mid-Year Progress Check Feb. 2019 4  and engage in therapeutic games during individual and group counseling sessions to assist students in recognizing appropriate responses to daily events and situations that may arise Students will learn how to utilize “I statements” in expressing how they feel during counseling services Students will focus on “Stop and Think” strategies during mandated counseling sessions to think before they react in certain situations    The Assistant Principal of Special Education, School Psychologist, Guidance Counselor and or Social Worker will provide professional development opportunities to paraprofessionals, teachers and staff focusing on de escalation strategies, as well as a feelings thermometer in recognizing specific feelings and talking through specific events that students may encounter Staff will be trained in Therapeutic Crisis Intervention techniques and strategies to de escalate frustrating situations students may encounter Staff will be trained in understanding Behavioral Intervention Plans specific students may be following    Behavior Intervention Plan meetings will be held every three months with related service providers, teachers, and parents in analyzing three months worth of graphs and behavioral data in determining if Counseling services are necessary to continue or if modifications to the Behavior Intervention Plan is necessary Service providers will flexibly change in providing students with mandated counseling services in order to be exposed to a variety of strategies and approaches in reaching their IEP goals   Related service providers will collaborate with one  another during Inquiry sessions to discuss the progress of mandated counseling students and to help develop a plan of action in assisting students in meeting their IEP goals. Social emotional awareness within our school community will be fostered through professional development opportunities for all staff. There will be a focus on building student centered environments where students feel secure and comfortable speaking freely to teachers/service providers about their personal challenges and concerns.  Professional development opportunities will focus on how teachers address, advice and speak to students in regards to their personal struggles. 5 Families, Students Sept 2018- June 2019 Administration All Teaching Staff Parent Coordinator  Counseling services will work on developing students’ productive life-long habits and skills through the use of Habits of Mind. 2. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups.  Increase translation services and communication tools to strengthen home school-partnerships focusing on reviewing behavioral data of students with Behavior Intervention Plans and mandated counseling services.  Targeted workshops for parents of children with disabilities on how to support students utilizing specific and targeted behavioral strategies at home.  Professional development opportunities conducted for all staff focused on behavioral strategies and interventions needed in meeting all students needs  Professional development opportunities focused on how teachers address, advise and speak to students in regards to their personal struggles. 3. Strategies to promote stronger family and community ties and to increase parent involvement in support of improved student outcomes. Families, Students, Sept 2018- June 2019 Administration All Teaching Staff  Parent Training Meetings conducted three times a year for parents of students on the spectrum to provide strategic behavioral supports and strategies to assist their children  Behavior meetings conducted every three months to discuss and analyze data and graphs based on behaviors exhibited daily  Parents will be provided with progress reports from all service providers focused on IEP goals that have been mastered and or modified  Tuesdays will be utilized for teachers/service providers to provide telephone and face to face meetings with parents on the progress and performance of their children related to their Individualized goals and mandated services. Parent workshops will be provided to focus on how to understand the various components of an IEP, as well as specific mandates and behavioral intervention plans. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 6  If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. n/a Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources Include: ● Translation Services ● Saturday Services and Workshops for Parents ● Tuesday, Parent Engagement Time Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  SIT meetings will be held monthly, we will review the USPE report to identify which children have been moved to a less restrictive environments. In February we will record the number of students who have moved to less restrictive environments to ensure we are on track to meet our goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  USPE reports   IEP's Stars Linkage reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) At-risk students are defined as students scoring L1 and L2 on informal class assessments, formal assessments and class observations. K-1 is measured by Fountasand Pinnellrunning records, as well as Anchor comprehension exams. Grades 2-5 utilizethe I-Ready Assessment. Grades 3-5 utilizethe Fall and Spring assessments. At-risk students are defined as students scoring L1 and L2 on informal class assessments, formal assessments and classroom observations. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Funded Literacy 1. Students are provided with remediation in inclusive of content areas of Literacy, Social Studies and Science. This instruction will be provided to a subgroup of students whose needs are the same. The teacher will vary the modality of instruction in addition to providing differentiated instruction that will best meet the needs of the students. Ongoing articulation between funded and classroom teachers ensures the instructional alignment of the educational program. Funded teachers bolster the home/school link by providing monthly workshops, monthly parent letters that are sent home in order to provide Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Via a push in/pull out model of instruction 1:8. /1:10 Teacher/Student service ratio. At-risk remediation after school. 1:17 Teacher/Student ratio. 1:8 Teacher/Student service ratio. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Services are provided 3 to 5 times a week during school hours. October 2017-June 2018 This service is available during the school day; two to five days per week for approximately forty five minutes during the months of September 2016-June 2017. Services are provided 2 times per week W/Th - 2:25 – 2:55 Non ENL Program W/Fr – 2:25 – 3:55 ENL Program 8  1:1 Student/Computerized Instruction Service is provided 3-4 times per week-45 minutes per session. Services can be provided daily. parents with curriculum updates, class happenings and areas of concentration. The school and class website is available to parents in order to provide additional suggestions and tools for use at home with their children. Teachers utilize this site as an additional opportunity to provide information to parents which provides activities for parents to use with their children in order to increase student achievement. 2 - An after school ELA/ENL program provides students in grades 2-5 (inclusive of Special Ed and ENL) differentiated instruction in the area of skill/strategy building and writing. This program incorporates all content areas with a focus levels on Social Studies/Science specifically. 3 - Remedial Phonics:Students in grades 2-5 (inclusive of SWD’s and former ENL’s). will be services with RTIprograms such as Fundations. This service supports students who need 9  Mathematics to further develop their letter/sound recognition, phonemic awareness, and fluency/accuracy 4- I-Ready- Grades 2-5 Diagnostic for reading that pinpoints student needs down to the sub-skill level, and ongoing progress monitoring shows whether students are on track to achieve end-of-year targets. 1. Funded Math: Students are provided with intensive skills-based instruction in grades 3-5. Differentiated instructional techniques are utilized in order to provide students with activities that meet their specific needs. There is ongoing articulation between funded and classroom teachers in order to ensure alignment of the educational programs and curriculum. In order to bolster the home/school link, parents are provided with monthly workshops, which provide them with activities to use with their children in order to ensure At-risk students are defined as students scoring L1 and L2 on informal class assessments, formal assessments and classroom observations. At-risk students are defined as students scoring L1 and L2 on informal class assessment, formal assessments and class observations. 1:8 – 1:10 Teacher/Student service ratio. 1:15-1:17 Teacher/Student service ratio 1:1 Services will be provided 3-5 times per week – 45 minutes per session September 2017 – June 2018. Services are provided 2 times per week W/Th - 2:25 – 3:55 Non ENL Program W/Fr – 2:25 – 3:55 ENL Program Student/Computerized Instruction Service can be provided daily. 0  student progress (October 2013-June 2014). 2 - An after school math program will be provided to students in grades 2-5 (inclusive of Special Ed and ELLs). The program focus will include computation and problem solving exploration. 3. - I-Ready- Grades ( 2-5 ) Diagnostic tool for mathematics that pinpoints student needs down to the sub-skill level, and ongoing progress monitoring shows whether students are on track to achieve end-of-year targets. Students will be provided differentiated guided instruction in those areas by the service provider in an effort to improve these skills to ensure that they meet and/or exceed Grade Level Performance Targets. Students will be provided differentiated guided instruction in those areas by the service provider in an effort to improve these skills to ensure that they meet and/or exceed Science Social Studies At-risk students are defined as students scoring L1 and L2 on State Exams, formal and informal assessments. Students will be provided content area instruction specifically targeting those skills that have been identified as deficient. At-risk students who are defined as those scoring L1 and L2 on grade level formal and/or informal assessments will be provided content area instruction specifically targeting those skills that Via a push in/pull out model of instruction January 2018June 2018. Services are provided to students ratio 1:8 This service is available during the school day 4 times per week forty five minutes per session Via a push in/pull out model of instruction Services are provided to students ratio 1:8/11:10 Services are provided 3 to 5 times a week during school hours. This service is available during the school day; 2-3 days per week for approximately forty 1  have been identified as deficient. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) At risk counseling students are defined as those students that are in need of social/emotional strengthening and growth. They are identified by the classroom teacher and /or family member. five minutes during the months of September 2017-June 2018 Via pull out model of at risk counseling services are provided to students in a ratio of 1:1 or in a group of 3 to 5 students provided by the School Social Worker, School Psychologist and/or Guidance Counselor Services are provided for 8 weeks during school hours October 2017-June 2018. This service is available during the school day 1-2 times per week for approximately 30-45 minutes. Grade Level Performance Targets. Teachers will utilize differentiated materials from the District 21 Social Studies pilot and Passport program through interdisciplinary learning merging literacy and content knowledge. Students will be provided at risk counseling through differentiated activities that are meant to target specific areas of social/emotional growth and well-being. The Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist /and or Social Worker will collaborate with classroom teachers and/or family members in an effort to meet the students specific needs. 2  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) P.S. 253 currently has no students in Temporary Housing 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Where applicable -Students identified as STH will be provided the necessary school supplies and transportation supports to ensure their academic growth. -Any student in need of counseling or access to social services will meet with the SAT Team to create a social emotional plan to ensure academic progress and positive social emotional health. -Parent coordinator will meet with parents (when applicable) to review school protocols and procedures to ensure a smooth transition. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). P.S. 253 currently has no students in Temporary Housing 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 3  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 4  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. In order to attract and retain Highly Qualified Teachers we will continue to provide the following: o We will advertise for vacancies on the DOE website and part of open market for high quality teachers. Rigorous interview process will take place to ensure high quality candidates including ATR teachers. Demonstration lesson, personal references will be required. o If necessary, Administrators will attend recruitment fairs to attract high quality candidates for vacancies. o Subject and Grade specific Instructional Lead Teachers will be identified in order to provide model lessons assist with instructional planning and work with teachers to baseline students most in need of additional support. o The Teacher Resource Center will continue to serve as an on-site resource where teachers can gain access to professional literature, instructional supports and sample templates to best meet the needs of their children. o Monthly Grade Meetings will provide teachers an opportunity to work collaboratively with administration to address new initiatives inclusive but not limited to CCLS, Differentiated and Rubric Driven Instruction. o Vertical Instructional Lead Meetings will be held weekly to address grade level instructional concerns and/or mandates. o Where applicable mentor teachers are assigned to assist with supporting new and struggling teachers. o Administration will work with Instructional Leaders to discuss opportunities for professional next steps and feedback. o Both tenured and non-tenured staff will be evaluated utilizing the Charlotte Danielson Framework for Teacher Effectiveness. In all cases opportunities to explore pedagogical concerns and next steps will be provided by administration. 5  o 15% of teacher P.D. hours which will be dedicated to of ELL instruction in order to best meet the instructional needs of our Beginning, Intermediate and Advanced Learners. o 50% of ELL teacher P.D. hours to Common Core Learning Standards; specifically the impact of the Common Core Instructional shifts on teaching and learning as reflected by Charlotte Danielson Framework for Teacher Effectiveness. o Our current teachers are all Highly Qualified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). o High quality professional development sessions for teachers, principal, and paraprofessionals, and staff through the use of in house providers who demonstrate highly effective practices. In addition external vendors pending funding and Brooklyn Support Service Centers PD offerings. High quality professional development is provided to our staff in an ongoing manner by our Principal, A.P.’s, and Lead teachers. o PD is differentiated by interest and by level of teacher effectiveness based on formal and informal observations. o Surveys will be distributed and include a section that invites teachers to indicate their willingness to provide P.D.’s to colleagues. o Professional Development in the areas of Data Driven Instruction – specifically focused on the CCLS in Math and Literacy will be provided throughout the school year beginning in September 2016– June 2017. o All staff will be provided Professional Development in the Response to Intervention (RTI) three tiered model of instructional support. This will enable them to identify and aggregate their most at-risk students In an effort to address and provide training to teachers on Bullying and Respect for All we will attempt to offer DASA training to all those staff who are in need of and/or are interested in training. We will, upon request, make every effort to provide DASA training to staff who are moving towards permanent certification. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 6  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Our Ass't principal of Prek-2 and Social Worker will continue to assist Pre-School families in the transition from early childhood programs, such as Head Start, Even Start, Early Reading First, or a State-run preschool program to local elementary. A variety of workshops were designed to expose parents to our new ELA and Math programs within Pre-K and familiarize them with strands as well as K-2. In addition parents are provided with explicit literacy and math skills and strategies in order to support children at home. Parents have been given resources to assist in reinforcing skills at home such as books, tool kits, supplies, games, websites and hands-on projects. After administering F & P any child that is 2-3 levels below the benchmark is identified as a “focus” student. Parents of all focus students are specifically invited to attend a workshop that directs the challenges of our focus students. Teachers use student data from classroom and curriculum aligned common assessments to inform instructional planning and decisions so that instruction is targeted and all students are aware of their next learning steps. Teachers use common assessments and administer benchmarks aligned to the ELA curriculum. Pre-K is currently using Core Knowledge English Language Arts program to be better aligned with K-2. By focusing on the same domains as K-2, our Pre-K students are building background knowledge in Social Studies and Science content areas, building upon their content specific vocabulary and becoming acclimated with the Skills and Listening and Learning strand of the program. Pre-K has now adopted the WWS which is an authentic assessment program that aligns with our CCSS program. The data generated from WWS is used to drive and target instruction. In order to ensure vertical alignment Pre-K – 5 teachers attend instructional lead meetings, horizontal and vertical team meetings, and professional development and Inquiry meetings. In an effort to properly identify and address the needs of all our students we provide Early Intervention Services. We will continue to work with and utilize strategies that develop social and emotional skills using visual tools to 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Each year on a continuum teachers are provided professional development which addresses student data and assessments. These assessment selections are an outgrowth of the instructional lead meetings, grade meetings and school leadership meetings and are monitored and revisited throughout the school year. This year the MOSL team met extensively to discuss and select school based measures of student learning as well as provided input to administration regarding the professional development which would support teacher best practices. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, 7  and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 722,633 59,357 27,982 Not Received Yet 5,755,690 Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) X X X X 23,25,29,34,37,40,43,45,49,57 23,25,29,34,37,40,43,45,49,56,57,61 23,25,29,34,37,40,43,45,57 23,25,29,34,37,40,43,45,47,49,61 Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Federal Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 8  2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 9  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 253, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 253 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents,( focus on ENL and SWD's ) work with their children to improve their achievement level, specifically in the areas of ELA ,Math S.S. Science ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress. ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand. Using technology to assist with communication and out reach . 0  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● parents are actively involved and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● provide an on site Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office. ● plan parent workshops that may include but not be limited to : parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report and Quality Review Report ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be 1  involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary School Act ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions regarding topics of choice ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee ● supporting or hosting Family Day /Weekend events ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 253, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share 2  responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information 3  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend) ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act and Title I programs II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 4  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or SED to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions 5  ● show respect for myself, other people and property ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully ● always try my best to learn . ask for assistance when needed 6  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 7  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Our Title 3 program is designed to offer support to our ELL students who are struggling to meet grade standards and need additional support in ELA and Math. The program will take place on Wednesday's and Friday's from November until June of 2019. It will take place from 2:30-4:00. It will include ELL students in grades 3-5. The program will focus in on developing language, reading, writing, speaking and listening skills in the ELA and Math. Students will be grouped using reading levels and ENL language levels. The program will utilize multiple materials inclusive of -Iready Digital Online Assessment and Instruction: -Ready Test Sophistication (ELA/Math) -Language Power/Writing and the ENL student -How to raise critical thinkers -The New Math Standards Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Our professional development plan will focus in on working with teachers to develop a scope of strategies to use with ELL students to build language, speaking skills, phonics skills and comprehension skills. PD will take place on Monday's during PD time with a minimum of 1 ENL focused professional development per month. Topics to be covered: -Comprehension Strategies for Struggling Readers -Deconstructing Text and Content Area Math Problems Using Stop Think Summarize Strategies and the Reciprocal Strategies -Explicit Phonics Instruction -Using NYSITELL NYSESLAT Data to identify modalities of need(2018-2019 Modality of Writing K-5 ) -Using Iready data to drive,remediate and scaffold instruction -Understanding the components of the NYSESLAT;specifically in the modality of writing - Creating opportunities to enhance and support conceptual understanding and number sense in Math 8  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Real family engagement is data-driven and must translate into increased student achievement. P.S 253's goal is to empower parents/ guardians to assist and monitor their child/children's learning. P.S 253's Parent Academy has monthly activities, workshops, resource materials and family engagement partnerships with various sources, for eg. Marquis Studios-Literacy Through The Arts; a new arts partnership with New York City arts and cultural organizations to sustain advance arts learning to students and families. This year in collaboration with our Parent Teacher Association and School Leadership Team our Parent Coordinator has organized 6 Saturday Weekend Workshops: Literacy Through The Arts- Marquis Studios. Six Workshops: 3 Workshops for Grades PreK-2, Immigrant students and their families (ENL and Non-ENL Students) and 3 Workshops for Grades 3-5, Immigrant students and their families (ENL and Non-ENL Students) Rationale: Arts Partnership Program This program supports arts partnerships that create and expand arts education opportunities for diverse groups of student participants, including ELLs and students with disabilities. School-based arts residences is designed to increase student achievement in and through the arts among a diverse group of learners, while developing, implementing and documenting best practices in arts education. Parents/guardians will be invited to the listed activities below with an invitation that has a tear-off bottom if they will attend, their name and child's name and grade. Each engagement activity will have a brief description and be given to parents of students in the targeted grades for the specific Saturday program provided by Marquis Studios. *Invitations will be translated in Native Home Languages as noted on the ELL's HLIS. Provider: Marquis Studios(10,000will come form a CASA grant) Topic 1: Parent Collage Grades K-2/3-5 families Date: February (tbd) Time: 9:30 a.m.-11:00 a.m. Topic 2: Latin Dance for Grades K-2/3-5 Families Date: March (tbd) Time: 9:30 a.m.-11:00 p.m. Topic 3: Bollywood for Grades K-2/3-5 Families Date: March (tbd) Time: 9:30 a.m.-11:00 a.m. Topic 4: Printmaking for Grades K-2/3-5 Families Date: April (tbd) Time: 9:30 a.m.-11:00 a.m. 9  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Topic 5: Yoga for Grades K-2/3-5 Families Date: April (tbd) Time: 9:30 a.m.- 11:00 a.m. Topic 6: Music and Percussion- Cinco de Mayo for Grades K-2/3-5 Families Date: May(tbd) Time: 9:30 a.m.-11:00 a.m. Title III Saturday Parent Engagement Family Literacy: Date: May (tbd) Time: 9:30 a.m.-11:00 a.m. A Project- Based activity which will utilize fiction and non-fiction text to develop a deeper understanding of Tier II and Tier III vocabulary. At the end of the workshop parents will be provided the "make and take" activity created during the workshop. A folder will be supplied to each parent, which will include resources and instructions on how to replicate and expand on the project with their children at home. Snacks will be provided 2 ESL pedagogues: Ms. Richards and Ms. Benjamin Parents will be invited by invitation with a brief description of the workshop and a bottom tear-off response. Parents/guardians with their children will be in the library during the presentation of the workshop, however during the activity session flexible subgroups will be formed according to their child/children's grade level. (Date tbd) Time: 9:30 a.m.-11:00 a.m. Attendance sheets and agendas will be collected by the parent coordinator and be maintained in the main office. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental. Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 0  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 1  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 21 School Name PS253 Borough Brooklyn School Number 253 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Lisa Speroni Coach Lesa Schwartz ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Yelena Moldavskiy Teacher/Subject Area Jonelle Benjamin- ENL Teacher/Subject Area Beth Haber - ENL Related-Service Provider Alla Lezhanskiy Superintendent Isabel Dimola Assistant Principal Clarissa Cigliano gr. 3-5 Coach Robin Berkowitz-Gellman School Counselor Danielle Susskind Parent TBD Parent Coordinator Gina Dacchille Field Support Center Staff Member tbd Other (Name and Title) Lauri Casale - AP Gr. k-2 C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 4 5 N/A Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 996 2 Total number of ELLs 199 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 19.98%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): N/A If yes, indicate language(s): N/A Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 0 N/A N/A 2 3 4 Lang. K 1 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 N/A N/A 0 N/A 0 0 N/A 5 N/A N/A 0 6 N/A N/A 7 N/A N/A 8 N/A N/A 9 N/A N/ 10 N/A 11 N/A 12 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 3  5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? For the upcoming school year 2015-16, in grades K-2, ELL students will be assessed using Fountas and Pinnell Running Records, the PLA (Primary Literacy Assessment) and weekly skill based benchmark exams. Each piece of data offers unique insights into the needs of ELL students in different capacities of literacy. The running records and PLA data provide teachers knowledge of ELL fluency and decoding skills including specific phonemic patterns students with which students struggle the most. Weekly skill based assessments will provide insight into comprehension skills students are struggling with so that ENL teachers can hone in on those skills. The data from the Fountas and Pinell Running Records reveal that all Kindergarten ELLs are reading below grade level. In Grade 1, 60% of ELLs are reading below level, 30% are reading on grade level, and 9% are reading above grade level. In Grade 2, 63% of ELLs are reading below grade level, 30% are reading on grade level, and 6% are reading at or above grade level. In grades 3-5 ELL students will be assessed using i-Ready Diagnostic & Instruction (an online assessment tool) three times a year. This tool breaks down the specific weaknesses of students in phonemic awareness, phonics, high frequency words, vocabulary and comprehension of both literature and informational text, providing the ENL teacher a complete report on the student's performance in each area. The program then designs an instructional path unique for that student's need. The data reveals that in Grade 3, approximately all ELLs are reading below grade level. In Grade 4, 93% of the ELLs are are reading below grade level and 7% are reading at or above grade level. In Grade 5, approximately all ELLs are reading below grade level. This year in grades K-5, teacher created assessments are to be given to ENL students 3 times a year. The teacher created assessments will mimic components of the NYSESLAT and include a speaking, listening, reading and writing component. These assessments will allow ENL teachers to hone in on the specific language and literacy skills students need to develop to progress their English proficiency level. All data from the assessments are being used to inform curriculum design and planning of instruction. The data is being used to form instructional student groups and to create targeted instruction to meet the language acquisition needs of the students. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The EN l teachers will assess students three times per year ,gather the data and identify the performance of each ENL student.This data will be shared at P.D's both horizontally and vertically in an effort to create a success pathway for students who have been identified as at risk. Providers and teachers will schedule meetings with parents in an 4  effort to share the student data a provide outreach to better support the families in and out of school. These meetings will occur during scheduled parent engagement time throughout the school year . b. TBE program. If applicable. Data will be tracked throughout assessment cycles for progress. This data will include Fountas & Pinnell, PLA, weekly skill based exams and ELL teacher created assessments for K-2 and Iready, baseline/culminating data and teacher created assessments for grades 3-5. During weekly inquiry teachers will analyze and track student progress using these assessments along with looking at student work samples for Ells. Fountas & Pinnell will be conducted 4 times a year and progress will be measured. Iready will be conducted three times a year and progress will be measured. Baseline/culminating exams will take place every 6 weeks and progress will be measured. Teacher created ELL assessments that mimic the NYSESLAT will be conducted twice a year and progress will be measured. This data will be inputted into a school wide platform on Google Docs. The data from assessments will provide information on how to best target professional development and provide information for ENL staff on what skills need to be re-taught and carried over into the next unit of study. ENL staff will meet with administration regularly to discuss data and next steps for instruction and curriculum based on assessments and student work. c. DL program. If applicable. Funded personnel will work with student's and classroom teachers to provide additional support in the areas identified in the data.Technology and programs such as I Ready .Myon and Image learning will be utilized to sup[port and enhance student learning. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Upon receiving the NYSESLAT scores, ELL students are strategically placed into classrooms, by English proficiency level and reading level. Many of our ELL students are placed into ICT classrooms, where they have the support of two teachers and an ENL teacher who provides Integrated ENL services during the literacy or math block. These classes also receive AIS support in both reading and math from funded providers. Additionally, ELLs can receive further intervention through targeted pull out programs using Passport Voyager and guided reading. The programs run for 6 weeks, in which growth is then evaluated and the RTI team collaborates to determine which students need further intervention. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The NYSITELL/NYSESLAT reveals that most of our students fall into the Expanding range. We also have a large portion of students who tested into the Commanding range. We have particularly high numbers of students in Grades 1 and 2 who tested at the Commanding level, demonstrating high levels of success in moving our early childhood students towards English proficiency. Data from the NYSITELL and the NYSESLAT reveal the following: Grades K-5: Grade K: 23 Entering, 15 Emerging, 11 Transitioning, 10 Expanding, 23 Commanding Grade 1: 6 Entering, 12 Emerging, 15 Transitioning, 24 Expanding, 8 Commanding Grade 2: 6 Entering, 2 Emerging, 2 Transitioning, 26 Expanding, 16 Commanding Grade 3: 2 Entering, 1 Emerging, 3 Transitioning, 6 Expanding, 13 Commanding Grade 4: 4 Entering, 2 Emerging, 3 Transitioning, 7 Expanding, 5 Commanding 5  Grade 5: 1 Entering, 2 Emerging, 3 Transitioning, 9 Expanding, 4 Commanding 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Monthly grade band data meetings will be used to disseminate and discuss the progress and performance of our students. This information will be gathered and presented at cabinet by the ENL team and together with the Administrative cabinet next steps will be designed and implemented. Teachers and support staff will be provided training in the identified areas of student need in an effort to best support the students. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Within every grade, we have ELL's in 1-3 classrooms with the exception of Kindergarten. In K-4, we are placing ELL students by proficiency level into two classes on each grade, in which at least one class is an ICT class. In grade 5 ELL students will be placed in the ICT class. Students will be grouped by proficiency level, in which entering, emerging and transitioning students will be grouped together and expanding and commanding students will be grouped together where possible. As per CR Part 154.2 requirements for ENL, we will be providing the required minutes via the Stand-Alone and Integrated ENL program models. Entering and emerging students will be grouped by proficiency level and pulled out for targeted language and phonics skills. Transitioning students will receive a combination of Integrated ENL and Stand-Alone ENL services. Expanding and commanding students will receive Integrated ENL services, in which the ENL teacher will push in during the literacy block , specifically guided reading, to provide small group targeted instruction aligned to the Social Studies/Science content of the grade's current unit, Common Core Reading and Writing Standards and the specific needs of ELL students at their assessed proficiency level. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Paste response to questions here: N/A 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Paste response to questions here: N/A 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. When programming students we ensure all instructional mandated minutes are met according to new ENL regulations as follows. Commanding students receive services through the Integrated ENL model in content area instruction (ELA or Math). An ENL staff will work with the Commanding students on grade level content, merging language and vocabulary modifications as needed. Expanding and transitioning students receive 180 minutes a week. For Commanding students, instruction will be done in the Integrated ENL model, during the literacy/math blocks. Students will be provided with guided group instruction merging content, literacy skills embedded in the CCS, and language development skills needed to progress in English proficiency. Transitioning students receive 90 minutes of Integrated ENL service in a content area (math) and 90 minutes of service in either Stand-Alone ENL or Integrated ENL/Content Area. Emerging and Entering students receive 360 minutes per week of ENL services. The students receive 180 minutes of Stand-Alone ENL services, in which the ENL teachers focus specifically on language, vocabulary and phonics instruction in relation to developing language skills. They also receive 180 minutes of Integrated ENL services by ENL staff, in which the ENL teacher will work with them in guided group support merging CCS literacy skill, unit content and language skills to improve English proficiency and literacy skills. 6  9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Core content is delivered in the Freestanding ENL program through Integrated ENL instruction. Teachers will be utilizing the workshop model in conjunction with a variety of ENL approaches to learning including explicit phonics, vocabulary and grammar instruction, the use of visuals, auditory and technology, cooperative learning to foster oral language, role playing, semantic webbing, sentence frames, building schema and metacognitive awareness. ENL staff will integrate language, background knowledge and vocabulary skills for ELL students using the Social Studies/Science content for the current ELA unit of study based on Expeditionary and Core Knowledge topics. ENL staff will also integrate language and vocabulary skills for ELL students during Math block instruction. For literacy instruction, the ENL staff will specially use shared and guided reading, to work with ELL students to master the Common Core literacy skills necessary to become proficient readers and writers. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? When applicable, ELL students are assessed in their home language through staff members sharing the same home language. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. A: SIFE students will be assessed immediately upon their return to the school and strategically placed in small group dependent upon their specific needs. We will additionally offer these students extra services such as AIS where applicable and Title lll after school program. B. Newcomer students will be placed when possible with students, teachers, or paraprofessionals who speak their home language. These students will also receive targeted instructional support to build the necessary communication skills Newcomers need to function day to day within the school and classroom setting. These will include such skills as greeting others, using basic vocabulary for social interaction, producing simple sentences and responding to very simple questions, and letter and sound identification. C: Developing ELLs will receive differentiated instruction specific to their needs in each modality. Students will be provided small group instruction with other ELL students of similar needs. Developing students will work to continue building their oral language skills, as well as take part in direct instruction to build reading and writing skills through the use of close reading strategies, answering TDQ's and building coherent, organized pieces of writing. These students will also be invited to attend Title lll after school programs. D: Long-Term ELLs will receive targeted instruction specific to their needs. E: Former ELLs will receive targeted instruction in building their Tier 2 and Tier 3 vocabularies as well as continued support and scaffolding in reading complex text and answering text dependent questions. These students will also receive AIS services in funded math and reading where necessary, to provide them additional targeted small group instructions. These students will also receive testing accommodations such as time and a half. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. All ELL-SWDs are provided access to content in a multi-faceted approach grounded in Universal Designs for Learning that will provide multiple access and entry points for all learners through the use of varied presentation, engagement and assessments of learning. Varied presentation will include the use of technology, visual, color coding, and kinetic/tactile experiences. Tasks will be differentiated using appropriate scaffolds, planning pages, and modifications to texts, based on individual needs. To drive instruction, data (frequent formative & summative) assessments are analyzed in order to differentiate literacy, content area instruction, support Tier II vocabulary with visuals support, etc. The ENL pedagogues in referring to the IEP goals integrate strategies, tasks reflective of the academic rigor of the CCSS, the ELL standards, objective benchmarks and relative grade expectations. Our ENL pedagogues are cognizant of the ELLs' strengths and weaknesses, therefore approach each ELL-SWD individually in their plan of instruction and will plan regularly with Special Education teachers to meet all student needs. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? All ENL staff will be trained in understanding students' IEP goals and strategies for working with SWD students. ENL staff will meet regularly with Special Education staff to plan curriculum collaboratively and discuss specific plans of action for individual 7  students. ENL staff will service the ICT and Self-Contained classrooms through a combination of Integrated ENL and Stand-Alone ENL services. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Our targeted intervention programs for ELLs are aligned to the CCSS- in literacy and math. The intervention services are provided in English and are targeted to address the needs of learners in each specific area with opportunities to engage in discipline-specific practices which are structured to build conceptual understanding, language competence and reading ability in a small group setting. - Passport Program-The SETTS-Special Ed specialist provides targeted intervention services to grades K-2, implementing the systematic Passport Program in a small group pull-out mode during the school day. This intervention provides ELL students extra support in phonemic awareness, phonics and fluency skills. Students will work on letter/sound correspondence, decoding and encoding skills. - Literacy AIS: ELL students in grades 2-5 reading below grade level will receive targeted intervention support in which funded AIS literacy staff will push/pull out into classrooms for intervention in literacy. AIS staff will use explicit phonics instruction for students struggling in decoding. Shared and guided reading approaches will be utilized to strengthen reading skills in reading complex text and answering text dependent questions with explicit modeling of discrete literacy skills and strategies. - Math AIS: ELL students in grades 3-5 performing below grade level on standardized math exams, chapter exams and I-ready assessments will receive math AIS services 5 times a week. Students will be pulled out by the funded math staff for small group math instruction aligned to the GO MATH curriculum and the targeted needs of the students being serviced. - Literacy and Math after school program: ELLs are supported in the areas of literacy and math for 3hrs, 2x a week in a supplemental intervention program. Small group instruction is designed and differentiated through formative assessment results and language proficiency levels. Supplemental texts have been carefully critiqued to support the rigor of instruction and standards-aligned shifts in the CCSS reflective in literacy and math. To further support instruction during mini-lessons, differentiated tasks, culminating activities, language models, in addition to resourceful supports : visual and graphic organizer templates, differentiated planning pages, tutorials via the SMARTBoard, iPad apps, vocabulary instruction which addresses the multiple intelligences (multi sensory), and the creation of anchor charts, etc. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? This upcoming school year we will be developing new teacher created assessments to monitor and track the progress of ELL students in the four modalities of learning, three times a year. The 2018-2019 school year focus will be in the modality of writing in grades K-5.These assessments will help drive instructional plans for ELL learners. Additionally, the ENL staff is providing Integrated ENL services during the literacy block with a greater focus on using guided reading instruction to improve reading proficiency for ELL learners in the application of discrete literacy skills and strategies. This will include more access to complex text and practice in citing evidence from the text to answer text dependent questions. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). No programs will be discontinued at this time. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? ELLs are afforded equal access to all programs at P.S 253. The school programs offered include: drama, math, music, library, gym, dance, and science. In addition on Fridays, ELLs participate in club activities of their choice during periods 7 and 8. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. 8  c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? This upcoming school year we will be utilizing a variety of instructional materials to support ELL learners such as Language Power, Brainpop ESL, I-ready, IXL, Discovery Education and Myon Learning. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Home language support is delivered in the ENL program and within the classroom setting. Home language support is 25% of total instruction as mandated by CR Part 154. Home language instruction is implemented by buddy pairs/grouping of speakers with the same language who are English proficient to support newcomers in the translation of routines, rules of the classroom, clarification of directions, and to assist in the translating for the newcomer etc. In addition, home language is supported in activating prior knowledge in the content areas (vocabulary, content, facts, etc.) through tasks that activate discussion, conversation and develop content vocabulary in context using the following resources: - Technology-home language apps downloaded onto sets of iPads, access to translation dictionaries on line. - Dictionaries in home language-English (Spanish, Russian, Uzbek, Bengali, Ukranian, Urdu and Arabic). - Social studies, science and math glossaries in (Spanish, Russian, Urdu, Uzbek, Bengali, Ukranian and Arabic.) - Home language fiction and non-fiction text in Spanish and Russian. - State assessments and exams in home language (Math and Science). - Dictionaries and picture cards in Spanish. - Translated verb, dolch word list, and Tier II and III word lists in grades K-5 in Spanish, Russian, Urdu and Arabic. - Home language trade magazines in Spanish. *In addition, empowering parents to speak and read to their children in their home language is vital in promoting literacy in L1 to L2 by reading fiction/non-fiction texts, news articles etc, with their children. In addition, parents can also encourage conversation implementing the 5 Ws about a text, news articles, retell what their child learned in school, the news on T.V, follow the directions of a recipe, etc. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. ELL pedagogues make certain that support and resources correspond to the age, grade and proficiency level of the ELLs. If there is great disparity between language level and grade, flexible, temporary grouping of ELLs is/are taken into consideration in meeting the needs of the Newcomer's proficiency level in a grade or group other than their own during one period of ELL instruction. When providing Integrated ENL instruction, the ENL staff provides ELL students with instruction in content appropriate to their grade level as indicated by the NYS Scope and Sequence in social studies and science. 9  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? This upcoming school year we will be utilizing a variey of instructional materials to support ELL learners such as Language Power, Brainpop ESL, I-ready, IXL, Discovery Education and Myon Learning. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our newly enrolled ELLs are assigned an "ELL Buddy" to assist in the orientation of the school day and translate directions in their home language as needed. The ELL pedagogue during their professional period works with the new admits individually or in a small group (2-3 students) to target phonemic instruction, decoding, Tier I vocabulary, the verb "to be" etc. Furthermore, vocabulary and content area instruction (CALP) is implemented immediately, even though language acquisition in L2 is at the beginning stages of BICS. ELLs need to acquire the necessary skills in all language modalities to meet grade expectations in a timely manner, since all ELLs take assessments and state tests in math, and science( in grade 4) with a 1year exemption status for the ELA in grades 3, 4 and 5. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. There are no language electives offered to students of PS 253, although it is a good educational practice. 0 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, N/A , testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 1  Part VI: LAP Assurances 2  basis. School Name: ENL staff will participate in weekly professional development sessions with classroom teachers. For the upcoming school year ELL professional development will focus on creating assessments for ELL students, providing Integrated ENL services during the guided reading period, teaching discrete literacy skills and strategies, teaching ELLs Tier 2 vocabulary, crafting tasks and TDQ's, differentiating for ELLs and using technology to enhance learning for ELL students. ENL staff will also participate in ENL study groups once a month with the ENL team in which team members will facilitate meetings and preparation of materials on a rotating ENL teachers will receive targeted professional development in using the writing and CCS, Close Reading Workshop model, fostering student discussion, crafting text dependent questions and explicit literacy skill and strategy instruction. ENL staff will also participate in inter-visitations in model classrooms during the literacy block. School DBN: The Parent Coordinator is the key person who assists in providing parents and 5th grade staff the information needed to assist ELLs in the transition from elementary school to middle school. The informative workshops (translated materials, resources and translators) are presented to empower parents during this transitional process. The workshops presented provide the necessary information "nuts and bolts" in aiding a smooth transitional process into middle school from filling out applications to selecting a school that will best fit their child's academic success. Additionally, this information is available to parents who were unable to attend the workshops information is available at the "Parent Information Kiosk." Subsequently, updated monthly calendars are sent home and posted on the school's website to further inform parents of middle school application deadlines, specialized school open house dates, middle school open house fairs, etc. Ms. Dacchille is always available to address the needs and questions of parents Weekly professional in house development will be provided through specific workshops on strategies for ELL instruction in math and literacy. Additionally, ENL staff will attend off site professional development throughout the year, targeted on providing instruction to ELLs.. The school secretary and ENL staff will maintain records of all professional development activities. These records which include agendas and attendance sign-in sheets, will be kept in the ENL Coordinator's room. The 15% (of total hours for all teachers) and 50% (of total hours for bilingual/ENL teachers) of professional development are scheduled during the professional days provided by the NYCDOE. Professional development topics include "Challenges in the Content Areas for ELLs in: Reading, Science, and Social Studies," " Selecting Tiered vocabulary to Teach ELLs," "The Four Stages of Second Language Acquisition." Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. phone. e-mail of ELLs office, by or cell in her Name (PRINT) Title Signature Our school will meet with with parents of ELLs individually to discuss the goals of our Freestanding ENL program and the targeted individualized plans for each ELL. ELL teachers will consult with classroom teachers and cluster teachers and will share with parents how the ENL teachers will support language acquisition. Qualified interpreters/translators will be provided in the parents' preferred language. Principal Date (mm/dd/yy) PS 253’s parent involvement activities are centered on the constant ongoing conversations with our ELL parent community. This continuous dialogue and subsequent activities “empowers parents” resulting in benefits for parents and children alike. Parent have: • Greater confidence in their role as their child’s first teacher. • More frequent attendance at school meetings and a stronger sense of responsibility for their child’s school performance. • Improved literacy and other skills. • Better communication with the school and 3  Paste response here: Assistant Principal The Magnet School of Multicult Parent Coordinator Lisa Speroni ENL/Bilingual Teacher teachers. PS 253’s administration and staff establishes a tone of respect for all families .The needs of parents are evaluated through: Parent Surveys: 1. Responses from the Spring Parent Survey given in English and parent/guardians’ native language as listed in the Home Language Survey are analyzed and discussed. 2. Survey Feedback after each Parent Engagement Workshop as to the effectiveness of the workshop and suggestions for possible future workshops. • Informal Parent “Chat & Chews”: ELL parents, PTA members and parent coordinator share thought and ideas during these informal “let’s get to know one another sessions”. • School Assessment Team (psychologist, social worker, IEP teacher) and the parent coordinator discuss the challenges our ELL parent community face/shared and what measures may be put in place to assist them. • Feedback from Teachers following individual parent meeting as to the ELL parents’ concerns or requests are shared so that broad topics of concern may be addressed at future parent meetings. (ex. of home/school communication) Lisa Speroni 21K253 9/8/16 4  Clarissa Cigliano Parent Gina Dachille Teacher/Subject Area Yelena Moldavskiy Teacher/Subject Area Saima Atiq Jonelle Benjamin Coach Coach Melissa Musman School Counselor Lesa Schwartz Robin Berkowitz-Gellman 9/8/16 Harris N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member 9/8/16 Other Isabel DiMola Other N/A Other N/A 9/8/16 9/8/16 9/8/16 9/8/16 9/8/16 9/8/16 9/8/16 Danielle Susskind 9/9/16 9/8/16 N/A 5  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 21k253 School Name: PS 253 Superintendent: Isabel DiMola The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Gina Dacchille Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. As part of our CEP, each year we assess the needs of parents via Parent Survey, S.L.T Meetings, Parent Teacher Conferences and P.T.A Meetings within the building. As we have a high ENL population, the issue of translation/interpretation is always a high priority for the parents. The needs assessment was based on written survey, home language survey, Parent Coordinator information sessions and Funded Meetings. Additional assessments included are School Quality Review, School Parent Survey, NYSESLAT, special education data and State Exams. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 6  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral X X X X X 70% 70% 70% 100% 70% X X X N/A X 30% 30% 30% N/A 30% Spanish, Russian Uzbek English Urdu 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families : Grading Policy September 2018 School Handbook September 2018 Meetings/ Notices September 2018- June 2019 Calendars September2018 -June 2019 Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Translated orally at General membership /Title 1 parent meeting Translation unit /Staff members Translated orally at General membership /Title 1 parent meeting Translation unit /Staff members Posted on School Website and Remind (These sites translate into the parent's native language) Translated by Translation Unit /Staff member Posted on School Website and Remind (These sites translate into the parent's native language) 7  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide ENLselection meeting September 2018 P.T.C September 13, 2018 ,November 3, 2016, March 8, 2018, May 16, 2018 I.E.P Meetings Throughout the Year Annuals/Triennials School wide /Grade level informational Session September2018-June 2019 interpretation service(s)? -Our school continues to employ staff members whose native language is aligned to the language needs of our parent community. This has provided us opportunities to work with and meet parents as needed throughout the school year. -Translation services via Big Word -DOE translation unit -Our school continues to employ staff members whose native language is aligned to the language needs of our parent community. This has provided us opportunities to work with and meet parents as needed throughout the school year. -Translation services via Big Word -DOE translation unit -Our school continues to employ staff members whose native language is aligned to the language needs of our parent community. This has provided us opportunities to work with and meet parents as needed throughout the school year. -Translation services via Big Word -DOE translation unit -Our school continues to employ staff members whose native language is aligned to the language needs of our parent community. This has provided us opportunities to work with and meet parents as needed throughout the school year. -Translation services via Big Word -DOE translation unit 8  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of an emergency our school is able to reach out to families by way of staff members who speak the languages within our school community(Para's,Teacher's and Related Service Providers) . In addition to the above we utilize the DOE 's translation services to support staff when they are calling parents during an emergency . Our school's website translates all school information into the languages spoken by our parents .Finally we use "Remind" an Internet /cell phone based program which send notifications to parents via text ,these translate into the parent's language. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. In September at our first meeting session all staff are provided copies of the Chancellor's regulations. Included in th this packet is A-663. This regulation is reviewed by administration to insure that the entire PS253 community is aware of our expectations when meeting with parents whose first language is not English. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Posters are displayed in the main entrance, the SAT room, Parent Coordinator's office and the main office notifying parents of their right to translation. Additionally, we will continue to inform parents of their rights under A-663 during P.T.A Meetings, S.L.T Meetings and Parent Workshops will continue to provide parents a forum to discuss their right to translation services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? In an effort to ensure that we are best meeting the needs of our parents we will ask parents for feedback regarding the quality and availability of translation services. This will be done via the following: - School Survey - SLT Feedback - PTA Feedback 9 
