2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP-CS) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 20K259 School Name: J.H.S. 259 WILLIAM MCKINLEY Principal: JANICE GEARY 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information William McKinley I.S. 259 20K259 332000010259 6-8 School Number (DBN): 7301 Fort Hamilton Parkway, Brooklyn, New York 11228 718 833-1000 Phone Number: 718 833-3419 Fax: Anthony DeBenedetto Adebenedetto@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Janice A. Geary Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Stephen Buccellato Michele Ngai Anthony DeBenedetto SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Michele Ngai N/A Nadine Fonseca,HeartshareBeacon Program CBO Representative: District Information Geographical District: 20 Karina Costantino Superintendent: 415 89 th Street, Brooklyn, New York 11209 Superintendent’s Office Address: kcostan@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 759-4912 Phone Number: 718 759-4842 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Brooklyn FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: MauriciereDeGovia Executive Director: 415 89 th Street, Brooklyn, New York 11209 MDegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-445-7448 Phone Number: 718-759-4842 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Janice A. Geary Stephen Buccellato Michele Ngai Josephine Mendola Nadine Fonseca Vanessa Lopez Tamara Stern *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Parent Member/Parent   Name Dana Casil Lauren Dixon Helen Verveniotis Anthony DeBenedetto Kim DiDonato Cindy Cavallaro Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/UFT Member/UFT Member/Parent Member/CSA Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Through the collaborative efforts of staff, teachers, administrators, parents, and community partners, McKinley empowers students to flourish while providing social-emotional supports in a diverse curricular and extracurricular program, inclusive of the arts, sports, and technology that encompass the "McKinley Experience." Students are immersed in rigorous instruction that provides opportunities for exploration, investigation, problem-solving, critical thinking, and self-discovery all while striving for academic excellence, social maturity, and physical and mental fitness. We embrace the challenges of middle school and come together as a community to be "The Pride of Bay Ridge."   In an effort to reach our aforementioned vision, our "mission" follows: Through the implementation of effective school-wide collaboration, communication, transparency, curriculum development, inquiry, and data delving, the school will make decisions that are in the best interests of individual students. The foundation of all decisions and program implementations are data based through inquiry. There will be a transparent system inclusive of all stake-holders in the operating of the school School building routines, discipline policy and safety procedures will be clear, consistent, and communicated to all. We will set high expectations for all students through the creation of an engaging , thought-provoking, rigorous curriculum that takes into consideration the needs of all students. The school will provide support and opportunity for every student no matter their level, disability, language proficiency, or background. A learning experience will be designed to open the door for students to become independent, life-long learners and problem solvers. Using a combination of formative and summative assessments, students will be provided with specific, actionable, and timely feedback to improve their academic abilities to show growth and, ultimately, proficiency. All teachers will be observed and evaluated with high expectations, provided with specific, actionable, and timely feedback. Professional development supporting all staff will be continuously provided to elevate instructional practices leading to student growth. McKinley culture will be driven by our shared goals of student development through content mastery and creative expression. The collaborative efforts, across the school building, foster a safe community for students to grow and flourish. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. William McKinley I.S. 259 is a large Title 1 (School Wide Program) middle school, geographically located in the southwestern section of Brooklyn, New York, and is part of Community School District 20. The school serves approximately 1,842 students in Grades 6–8. Thirteen percent (13.68%) of students, totaling 252, are English Language Learners, and 11.51% percent, totaling 212, are identified as Students With Disabilities. We have a diverse student population comprised of 43.67% Asian, 33.67% White, 20.20% Hispanic, 1.30% Black, and .48% Hawaiian/Pacific Islander. The number of students that qualify for ‘free or reduced lunch’ is 1472 (1363 free and 109 reduced, totalling 79.95% of the student body) and we have one student in Temporary Housing. The student body is comprised of 982 males (53.31%) and 860 females (46.69%). William McKinley's Middle School, School Quality Guide indicated the following ratings from the six elements of the Framework: In Rigorous Instruction, we are rated as "Exceeding Target," in Collaborative Teachers, we are rated "Exceeding Target," in Effective School Leadership, we are rated as "Exceeding Target," In Strong Family-Community Ties, we are rating "Approaching Target," in Trust, we are rated as "Meeting Target," and in Supportive Environment, the determinations are not completely in yet. According to our last "Framework for Great Schools Report," we were indicated as "Excellent" In rigorous instruction, "Excellent" in collaborative teachers, "Good" in supportive Environment, "Excellent" in effective school leadership, "Good" in strong family-community ties, and "Good" in trust, all working towards our student achievement rating of "Meeting Target." Previously, our school had a 95% percentile rating in the city and received the designation of "Well Developed" on 2014-2015 Quality Review. We surpassed the citywide averages in all of the Capacity Framework Elements, except for strong family-community ties. 0  Overview of Instructional Programs and Special Initiatives McKinley has a legacy of providing its students with an academically challenging program while supporting the idea of community and trust with our robust after school and enrichment programs. We believe so strongly in creating and maintaining a robust after school program (academic and extracurricular), that, as a school, we conducted a School Based Option (vote) to modify the contract and the start and end times to the school day. That said, 95% of the staff voted to have the additional 155 minutes per week, otherwise referred to as the "extended day time" (which includes time for professional development and parent engagement), spread out over Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday morning, in order to have student dismissal be consistently 2:55 (where our after school programs can be maintained Monday through Friday without interruption. Many of these after school programs are academic, but many of them are also geared towards physical and mental fitness (see below), demonstrating that the leadership team and McKinley IS 259 prioritizes the physical wellness and the instruction of healthy habits of our students. McKinley's Overall Instructional Initiatives for the 2017-2018 SY:  McKinley has a STEM program with a STEM Mission Statement: o Here at McKinley, we provide students with an educational experience that excites, engages, and enriches the mind through a unique, learn-by-doing curriculum founded in the principles of Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics. We believe that students will develop their critical thinking skills by addressing real-world issues, and increase their conceptual understanding across all disciplines, furthering the goal of leaving McKinley as academic life-long learners.  We have a Saturday Academy for English Language Learners and the Arts  Superintendent and Honor Programs Grades 6, 7, 8 (seven 6th grade classes, eight 7th grade classes, and seven 8th grade classes) Independent Investigations Method (IIM)-An enrichment program that offers an opportunity for participation in independent investigations of student choice on all three grade levels, all having separate focuses   Virtual Enterprises Junior Ventures- an enrichment program that develops technology and entrepreneurial Foreign Language Proficiency Test – Spanish skills by starting and managing business ventures for 7th and 8th grade students Integrated Math Regents Grade 8 in Superintendent and Honor classes Living Environment Regents Grade 8 in Superintendent and Honor classes    American History Regents Grade 8 in Superintendent and Honor classes   Duolingo- supplemental Spanish language instruction  Technology – Including Presentation stations, schoolwide wireless internet, 550+ mobile computer labs, 150 iPads, Smartboards, four 3D printers (for student designed prototypes), Codesters (computer programming), STEM + A, Computer Science, Duolingo, Brain Pop, Moby Max, EVERFI- internet safety and social studies link, MyLibraryNYC.org, iReady, Newsela, iXL, , and Google Apps for Education, Google Suite  Visual Arts, Chorus, Keyboard, Modern Movement, Drama, Strings, Marching Band, Band/Orchestra Program  Midori & Friends CASA Grant (Cultural After-School Adventures) SPECIAL PROGRAMS AND EVENTS ‘I Love Me’ Campaign Leadership Club    National Junior Honor Society   School Play School sponsored community events including Veterans Day celebration, Memorial Day Commemoration event, and Project Heart: Collaboration of History and Literacy to promote life lessons regarding the Holocaust 1    School wide Art Exhibitions of student work Stage Doors and Open Doors funded through TDF – Partnership with theater professionals; view plays with post-performance discussions with professionals Student Government   Anti-bullying Campaign and Peer Mediation (NYC Winners 5 years in a row for anti-bullying campaign)  Theater Development Fund (TDF) Partnership-for 6th grade (free Broadway Show)  Music and Arts Festivals o Winter Concert, Spring Concert, Night of Performance EXTRA-CURRICULAR ACTIVITIES  SPORTS o CHAMPS – Athletic program featuring Flag Football, Basketball, Volleyball, Flag Rugby, and Soccer o Cheerleading & Pep Squad, Mighty Milers Running Club o NYC Middle School Basketball League For Boys and Girls TEST PREP  Math, ELA, Language Development (NYSESLAT), American History, Living Environments Regents Test Taking Skills Specialized HS Test Preparation Classes Specialized HS Portfolio Preparation   PARTNERSHIPS SIFMA Foundation Stage Doors/Open Doors, sponsored by the Theatre Development Fund iLearn-Blended Learning Institute  Virtual Enterprises Junior Ventures  National Junior Honors Society  Theatre Development Fund    Greenwood Historic Cemetery   Wall Street Journal Stock Market Game  Runaway Art Program: Interpreting Colonial Slave Ads  Project Heart: Collaboration of History and Literacy to promote life lessons regarding the Holocaust  The Helen Keller Institute  National Council of Teachers of Mathematics  9/11 Tribute Center  9/11 Memorial Museum Docent  Con Edison’s STEM Day Out Program through the National Museum of Mathematics (MoMath)  Relay for Life (American Cancer Society)  Midori & Friends CASA Grant (Cultural After School Adventures)  The Billion Oyster Project  Just Say Hi Initiative (Partnership with Fort Hamilton High School) CLUBS Spanish Club Starfish/Anti-bullying club International Student Council Club  Chess Club (2015-2016 City Champs)     Culinary Arts  Cultural Connections 2  Fashion/Costume Club I Love Me First Lego League Leadership Club Scenic Arts Starfish, Anti-Bullying Campaign Library Crew French Club   Drama Club   Textile & Design   Mighty Milers    Math Counts Club    Marching Band, Concert Band, Strings, Keyboard, Theater   Yearbook Club  Duolingo    Newspaper Club    6th Grade Virtual Enterprise Intro Prep Program  Typing Club  Poetry in the Park Safety squad Stock Market game Fitness Club STEM Club COMMUNITY BASED ORGANIZATION (HEARTSHARE BEACON): The Beacon program is designed to help create a seamless day from the traditional school day to after school where students can enjoy assistance with homework and then participate in activities, inclusive of games and sports. NYC COMMUNITY SCHOOL GRANT RECIPIENT (21ST CENTURY GRANT- (21st CCLC): "Community Schools are a strategy to organize and share leadership to integrate social services into the fabric of the schools. Community Schools align resources with vision and purpose resulting in improved student learning, stronger families, and healthier communities. Community schools offer a holistic approach toward improving academic performance driven by strong, collaborative partnerships among principals, parents, teachers, and CBOs. In Community Schools, parents are the real active partners in their children's education, the school climate is joyful and positive, and expanding learning opportunities are abundant." -- NYC Community Schools 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Many of our students at McKinley are qualified for free or reduced lunch. As a result of that, we are a Title 1 school. Additionally, we have approximately 13.68% ENLs and 11.51% Special Education Students. These students, in particular and in an effort to provide Equity and Excellence, need additional guidance and support in terms of language acquisition, reinforcement, and other academic supports including visuals, hands-on learning, modeling of activities, as well as after school stregthening and enrichment programs to raise them up to the level of all the students. Currently, we have 2 self-contained classes on each of the three grades, one 12:1 and one 12:1:1, respectively. With that, we have Integrated Co-Teaching classes on each grade (4 on the 6th- two of those being a GNT ICT class; 4 on the 7th grade- two of those being GNT ICT; and 4 on the 8th grade- with one being a GNT ICT). 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 3  William McKinley made considerable progress in the "collaborative teachers" element of The Framework for Great Schools. It is in this element that we had 100% of the teachers working collaboratively within and across contents to improve upon student success by focusing our professional learning time on student inquiry and the evidence of our impact on their learning. We triangulated data from summative assessments, formative assessments, and then current student work to provide feedback using research-based strategies for improvement. With that, we also continue to improve as in the 2015-16 year, we were "meeting the target" as it pertained to Student Achievement, per the School Quality Snapshot / MS, but are now "Exceeding the target." Additionally, we continue to make considerable strides in designing rigorous instruction targeting the specific needs of all our students, including English Language Learners and Students With Disabilities. According to the 2017-18 school quality guide, we exceeded the target in Rigorous Instruction, Collaborative Teachers, Effective School Leadership; we met the target in Trust and are approaching the target in Strong Family-Community Ties (with no final rating in "Supportive Environment." Three years ago, we started using Skedula, an online grading and communication system, to have continuous, open communication with parents. Currently, we have 76.6% of the parents (1355 of 1768 and up from 66.1% last year) enrolled on Pupil Path- the parent portion of Skedula. Additionally, we made consistent improvement in the number of parent responses on the School Learning Environment survey (69% in 2012-13 to 72% in 2013-14, to 75% in 2014-15 to 81% in 2015-16 to 80% in both 2016-17 and 2017-18), but, again, we need to continue to make additional progress. 4  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 20K259 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1852 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 60 68 24 20 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 42 35 22 13 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 80.0% % Attendance Rate 74.2% % Reduced Lunch 13.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.1% 20.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 33.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 14.09 0% 8% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 65.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES NO NO YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 101 103 12 96.1% 6.1% 12.0% 1.2% 44.4% 0.6% 12 16% 7.9 69.7% 86% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A NO YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. ● ELA and Math curricula will be revised based on last year’s experiences with materials and student needs; Social Studies and Science curricula need to be consistently revamped to best reflect the common core instructional shifts and encompass literacy strategies common to all subject areas. ● Based upon the triangulation of school data from the state assessments, embedded and culminating assessments, and student work we have found that our students need continued practice in rationalizing textual evidence and being able to explain their ideas and thoughts in a well-organized, written manner. ● Based on student data from a year-long inquiry process, students must have deeper exposure to developing critical thinking skills through experiential practices and enrichment models, as they become increasingly independent and able to self-assess. Additionally, they need to focus more on academic vocabulary. ● Over the course of the last 4 years, the ELA trends indicate that student proficiency rates have increased from 48% in 2014-2015, to 56% in 2015-2016, to 60% in 2016-2017, to 65.5% in 2017-2018. Moreover, in Math, the data is also trending from 64% proficiency in both 2014-2015 and 2015-2016, to 69% in 2017-2018. With that, there is a need to continue to focus on revamping curriculum to continue with the positive increases in student proficiency rates. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all departments will meet to evaluate, synthesize, adapt, revise, and implement a minimum of four common core and NYS Next Generation Standards aligned units of study inclusive of an academic vocabulary focus, scaffolds, supports, and, where applicable, engaging project-based learning opportunities to meet the needs of all students, including English language learners, students with disabilities, and advanced students, as evidenced by a 3% growth on teacher observations and data from Advance 1e and 3c and a 2% increase in student achievement on the ELA and Math State exams. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Support teachers and teacher teams in planning lessons and Teachers Sept. 2018-June, 2019 units, strengthening teaching practices, making adjustments to the curriculum to incorporate enrichment tasks, including modifications for English Language Learners, Students with Disabilities and providing professional development aligned to the Danielson Framework. This will impact ENL and SWD students by creating methods for accelerating their learning, rather than creating ways that remediate their learning. Provide professional development through DOE and district Teachers initiatives as well as through the United Federation of Teachers Teacher Center (UFT-TC), Independent Investigations Method (IIM), and Virtual Enterprise, including an in depth understanding of Advanced Literacy (Language acquisition, academic and domain specific vocabulary building by studying a set of high utility/cross curricula words through our inquiry and daily teaching practices). Disseminate information on progress of curriculum writing Teachers and turnkey information in Professional Learning Communities, Common Planning, Curriculum, and Department Gatherings in an effort to make certain that the strategies employed are in fact having positive results (ie., Are the strategies of the Frayer Model or semantic gradation we used to increase academic vocabulary working?) Department Chairs, UFT-TC Staff Developer, Peer Collaborative Teacher (PCT), Model Teachers (MTs), informal teacher leaders Sept. 2018-June, 2019 UFTTC Staff Developer, Virtual Enterprise, IIM, DOE, District 20 Liaisons, BFSC Liaisons Sept. 2018-June, 2019 UFTTC Staff Developer, Peer Collaborative Teacher (PCT), Model Teachers (MT’s), and District 20 and BFSC Liasions 7 Distribute a Parent Guide for unpacking the Common Core Parents Learning Standards and the NYS Next Generation Learning Sept. 2018-June, 2019 UFTTC Staff Developer, Parent Coordinator, Standards in English Language Arts and Math. PTA President 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The coaches, administrators, and parent coordinator in partnership with the PTA President and executive board, will have a curriculum night planned in September of 2018 and again in May of 2019. At these events, staff will review the curriculum expectations. With that, translation services are available in Chinese, Arabic, and Spanish. Furthermore, we have created a Saturday school program designed to teach parents computer skills aligned to help parents support their children. Additionally, we will distribute a Parent Guide for unpacking the Common Core and Next Generation Learning Standards in ELA and Math, through our planned Literacy and Math Engagement Nights that we will hold at some point throughout the year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Remuneration for Administration, UFTTC Staff Developer, PTC, MT’s, Parent Coordinator ● Per session for curriculum writing teams (24 teachers for 50 hrs. each) ● Professional development time scheduled during the extended days. There is no cost associated with this activity ● Librarian to support the IIM program in 6th, 7th, and 8th grades In addition to the above, during our Literacy and Math Nights we will be facilitating information sessions on the various NYS Next Generation Standards, as well as the CCLS. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E X 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January, 2019 two updated units of study from each department will have been completed. Revisions will be based upon two cycles of student inquiry that triangulated data from state-wide assessments, in class summative and formative assessments, and in-class, ongoing formative assessments, as well as student work. The information will all 8  be stored in a subject and grade-specific Google Drive (or binder) for the convenience of all teachers and administrators. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) The Instrument of measure used to assess the progress towards meeting this goal will be the finished products- meaning, the updated curriculum- and student progress shown on benchmark, in-class assessments, and possibly Midterms. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based on the 2017-2018 School Quality Report on McKinley: ● 87% of the students had positive responses to questions on safety (higher than NYC average) ● 70% of the students had positive responses to questions on classroom behavior (higher than NYC average) ● 97% of the students had positive responses to questions pertaining to social-emotional support (higher than NYC average) ● 76% of the students had positive responses to questions pertaining to peer support for academic work (higher than NYC average) ● Overall, there was a 80% positive student response rate for Supportive Environment (higher than NYC average) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all (100%) students will be encouraged to be good citizens by coming to school in a timely manner, having good attendance, working to their best academic abilities and respecting their peers through positive reinforcements, as evidenced by an increase of 3% in student to student support based on the School Environment Survey and a decrease of 5% in overall student suspensions based on our OORS reporting system. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Promote the Anti-Bullying campaign through the Starfish All Sept. 2018-June, 2019 Club, The International Student Council, individual class presentations, Assembly presentations, and peer mediation. Students, including SWDs and ELLs Promote good attendance through class competitions and All Sept. 2018-June, 2019 student/class awards. Students, including SWDs and ELLs AP in charge of Safety, AP in charge of Student Support Services, Guidance Counselors, Deans, School Assessment Team, SAPIS worker, and teacher in charge of aforementioned clubs. AP and School Aide in charge of attendance, AP in charge of Student Support Services, Guidance Counselors, Deans, School Assessment Team Promote good academics through academic awards All (Certificates of Merit, Honor Roll, and Principal’s List). Students, including SWDs and ELLs Sept. 2018-June, 2019 APO and School Aide in charge of academic awards Conduct PTA workshops on the prevention of bullying and Parents Sept. 2018-June, 2019 PTA President, Parent Coordinator, provide translators to facilitate delivery. Students will be supported in a social-emotional way by taking part in a series of workshops with their parents directed to improve their social-emotional well being: Inclusive of these workshops are "Mental Health 101" and "Mindfulness Training," by Manuel Molina, School Mental Health Consultant through the Office of School Health. All Students Sept. 2018- June 2019 SAPIS Worker and Paraprofessional PTA President, Parent Coordinator, Administrative Team, Office Of School Health Mental Health Consultant 1  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will be conducting PTA workshops on the prevention of bullying and we will also provide translators to facilitate delivery. Additionally, we will ask support from the principal and the PTA to have an international student council and an anti bullying campaign (Starfish), similar to how we had this year. Furthermore, we will have opportunities to have parents participate in an awards night and National Junior Honor's Society that celebrates student success. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Remuneration for the aforementioned staff to conduct their clubs (4 teachers, 50 hours each) ● Translation services (3 teachers 25 hours each) ● Materials (awards certificates) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February of 2019, there will be a 5% decrease of overall student suspensions, as evidenced by the student to student incident reports in OORS. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instruments of measure used to assess progress towards meeting this goal will include results from the Learning Environment Survey (once the latest information has been culled), student attendance and lateness records, and student to student incidents reported in OORS. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. ● Using the Advance MOTP Dashboard, the Assistant Principal’s Inquiry group has analyzed the data for informal and formal observations and identified that 39% of teachers have been deemed Effective and 5% Developing in Danielson's Domain 3, Components 3b, 3c, and 3d collectively. ● Further analysis of the Advance School Level MOTP Summary report indicates that as stand alone components, all teachers showed a rating of 40% effective and 3% developing in 3b, a 36% effective and 6% developing in 3c, and a 44% effective and 5% developing in 3d. ● In addition to that, according to Advance MOTP Dashboard, the APs have analyzed the data for informal and formal observations and identified that all teachers show a 32% effective, 6% developing, and 1% ineffective in Danielson's Domain 1e (planning and preparation), collectively. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all (100%) teachers will participate as part of a data inquiry team in order to analyze students work products, discern student strengths and weaknesses, research potential strategies to tailor instruction for all students, including English language learners, students with disabilities, and advanced students, as evidenced by a 3% level of growth in data gathered through observations using Danielson's Components 1e, 3b, 3c, and 3d collectively and a 2% increase in student achievement on both ELA and Math State exams. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All administrators will support teacher growth that shifts Teachers Sept. 2018-May, 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals teacher practices through a minimum of three informal observations followed by specific, actionable, and timely feedback. All teachers will participate in professional development that Teachers Sept. 2018-June, 2019 will better inform their practice in all Danielson components to improve pedagogical delivery with special emphasis on Danielson’s components 1e, 3b, 3c, and 3d. Professional development will include evidence and research based Teachers/ Students Sept. 2018-June, 2019 strategies to improve instruction for ELLs, SWDs, and GNT students. Parents will be updated on curriculum, student needs and Parents strategies to promote collective responsibilities of learning. Sept. 2018-June, 2019 Teachers Sept., 2018-June, 2019 All teachers will meet in teams (by grade and subject) in at least 3 cycles of inquiry. The teachers will meet regularly during their allotted professional development time to review student work with a special lens on students with disabilities, ENLs, and GNT students were applicable. The facilitators of these meetings will be various teacher leaders who are members of the Teacher Incentive Fund (TIF), and a United Federation of Teachers-Teacher Center Staff Developer (UFTTC). The cycles of inquiry are based on The Framework for Great Schools where the teams plan, implement, reflect and adjust, and share lessons learned. Principal, Assistant Principals, UFTTC Staff Developer, PCT, MTs and other informal Teacher Leaders Assistant Principals, UFTTC Staff Developer, PCT, MTs and other informal Teacher Leaders Principal, Assistant Principals, UFTTC Staff Developer, Parent Coordinator, PTA President, Teachers Assistant Principals, UFTTC Staff Developer, and PCT, MTs, and other informal teacher leaders 4  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be updated on curriculum, student needs, and strategies to promote collective responsibilities of learning. We will encourage parents to attend themed PTA meetings that are based on the varying major subjects- specifically ELA and Math, where we can speak with parents of students who are part of the inquiry process. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Remuneration for Administration, Parent Coordinator, UFTTC Staff Developer, PCT, MTs, and other informal teacher leaders. ● Professional development time scheduled during the extended days. There is no cost associated with this activity. ● There are currently 5 model teachers, a peer collaborative teacher (coach), and a staff developer through the UFTTC all who will lead weekly professional development student inquiry cycles, along with administrative input weekly. ● Administrators will conduct monthly inquiry meetings to focus on monitoring progress. ● Instructional resources have no cost as we are using current state assessment scores, samples of teacher made summative and formative assessments, and current samples of student work to triangulate data to impact inquiry and subsequently modify curricula. ● The schedule adjustments are minimal as the staff voted to reconfigure the time allocated for professional development from Monday and Tuesday afternoons, to Monday and Tuesday mornings, respectively. ● Teacher per session is available for continuous work on documenting the changes made to the curricula based on collaborative teacher meetings, as well as to document inquiry. ● Supervisor per session is also available for oversight of all after school activities that deal with collaborative teacher meetings, inquiry and curricula modifications. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February of 2019, 100% of the teachers will have been provided with professional learning opportunities and support to develop a culture of collaboration as it relates to student inquiry with a focus on students with disabilities and English Language Learners, where applicable, as evidenced by two completed cycles of inquiry per the 5  Framework for Great Schools, and an overall 3% teacher growth average in Danielson's components 1e, 3b, 3c, and 3d collectively. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument used to measure the progress towards meeting this goal will be the collective, whole school MOTP located on the Advance dashboard. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Due to an increase in enrollment, a large number of new teachers have been hired over the course of the previous 3 years. Based on our analysis of the Measure of Teacher Practice, we found that our new teachers in particular need additional support in Danielson''s Domain 1, Component 1e and Danielson's Domain 3, Components 3b, 3c, and 3d. Further analysis of new teacher MOTP reports concluded that in component 1e, 11% of the new teachers were developing and 17% were effective, in component 3b, 6% were developing and 56% were effective, in component 3c, 22% were developing and 22% were effective, and in component 3d, 17% were developing and 39% were effective. In an effort to improve overall instruction and student growth for English language learners and students with disabilities (particularly those students who are taught by the "newer" teachers), the principal will provided additional support and professional development to improve their instruction to have a positive impact on student achievement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the Principal will continue to facilitate the building of coherent instructional and social-emotional supports for new teachers so as to have a positive impact on improving student achievement for all of their students, including English language learners, students with disabilities, and Advanced students as evidenced by a 5% increase on effective and highly effective components for new teachers and a 2% increase on State ELA and Math exams. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The Principal and administrative staff will oversee weekly collaborative meetings analyzing instruction/curriculum effectiveness data. Adminstra-tive Staff, Sept 2018- June 2019 Adminstrative Staff, Coaches, Teacher leaders, and staff. Coaches, Teacher leaders, staff An Assistant Principal Inquiry Team will further analyze information gleaned from collaborative staff meetings and current Measures of Teaching Practice and report their findings to the Principal, coaches, and teacher leaders. Coaches and teacher leaders will brainstorm with staff to facilitate instructional improvements and strategies based on research. The Principal will assign a mentor to all 2nd year teachers, not only the requisite 1st year teachers. Additionally, she will assign a mentor to any teacher who needs or wants additional support. Teacher per session is available for continuous work on documenting the changes made to the curricula based on collaborative teacher meetings. Staff, Students Sept 2018- June 2019 Administrative staff, coaches, and teacher leaders. A Saturday Academy, 2 Newcomers Classes, Title III Enrichment, and Homework Helper are all available to provide extra support to the English Language Learners. ELLs Sept 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principal in charge of ENLs The Inquiry process will also use data to address instructional/emotional/social concerns for students with disabilities (SWDs). We have a dedicated social-emotional inquiry team to help teachers work with students in need. These teachers will learn strategies and tools to help work with students who are in need of social-emotional supports so as to make certain they have academic success. SWDs Sept. 2018- June 2019 Staff, including Academic Intervention Specialist, Deans, Guidance Counselors, and School Psychologist. Teachers will be supported in a social-emotional way by taking part in a series of activities or workshops directed to improve their social-emotional well being: Inclusive of these activities are Teachers Sept. 2018- June 2019 Manuel Molina, Office Of School Health Mental 8 teacher-led Yoga, teacher-led volleyball games, and "Mental Health 101" and "Mindfulness Training," by Manuel Molina, School Mental Health Consultant through the Office of School Health. Health Consultant; Teachers, Administrative staff. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be notified if their child is part of the inquiry focus as an English language learner or student with disability (or both). Parents will be notified of any after school or Saturday program that helps improve overall student achievement. Parents will also be invited to participate in the inquiry process so as to provide an additional, pertinent information on their child. Parents will be invited to participate in family driven activities revolving around academics- literacy night, math night, international night, and college and career night. Additionally, parents were invited to the "Mental Health 101" workshop in September of 2018, as well as the "Mindfulness Training" scheduled in May (during PTC). Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Using the Framework For Great Schools and the inquiry process, we can best inform teachers on how to improve overall instruction. ● Using the MOTP Dashboard we can review overall teacher data, including new teacher effectiveness. ● Remuneration for after school activities focused on English as a New Language (ENL), students with disabilities (SWDs), and General education students. ● Using professional development time during the school day which has no cost. ● The Special Education Teachers will use Goal Book. ● The Assistant Principals will conduct monthly inquiry meetings to best assist new teachers. ● The new teachers will have direct access to the UFTTC Staff Developer, the PCT, and MTs for assistance and demonstration lessons/coaching. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 9  By February of 2019, all new teachers (100%) will have received feedback using informal (evaluative and non-evaluative observations) and formal observations by the principal. Additionally, all new teachers will take part in 2 inquiry cycles to better improve upon their instructional strategies through collaborative meetings where they analyze instruction/curriculum effectiveness and data in an effort to improve instruction for and academic achievement of students with disabilities, English language learners, and gifted and talented students. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument used to measure the progress of new teacher effectiveness in this goal is filtered data from Advance MOTP that focuses only on new teachers. An additional instrument used to measure the progress of this goal for new teachers will come from the routine documentation of mentoring interactions. Furthermore, new teachers will also be receiving a minimum of 2 class periods of mentoring by a full time, certified New Teacher Mentor who focuses on the aforementioned components. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. ● Based on attendance at Parent Teacher Association (PTA) meetings, we need to find additional and more innovative ways to reach out to parents to increase school-parent-community relations. ● Based on the Quality Review conducted in January of 2015, it was suggested to send out a user-friendly parent guide to unpacking the Common Core Learning Standards and discuss them at parent involved functions. With that, we will add NYS Next Generation Standards as well. ● Although the NYC School Environment Survey parent response rate was 81% in the 2017-2018 school year, we need to make even more improvements in the response rate. ● Our online communication system, Skedula/Pupil Path, has seen an increase in parent registrations from only 66% in the 2015-2016 school year, to 75.7% in the 2016-2017 school year, to 80% in the 2017-2018 school year. ● To date, our parent attendance in school and community events increased from 1154 in the 2015-2016 school year, to 1400 in the 2016-2017 school year to over 3000 in the 2017-2018 school year (not including Parent Teacher Conferences) with the inclusion of additional themed PTA nights (Literacy, Math, International Student Council, Business Connections). ● Positive response rates regarding parents went from 71% in 2016-2017 to 76% in 2017-2018 regarding "parent involvement in school" questions from the School Learning Environment Survey, according to the 2017-2018 school quality guide for McKinley. ● Based on the 2016 Framework for Great Schools Report, McKinley 259 went from being rated "fair" with a 2.16 rating to a rating of "good" with a 3.05 overall score in the 2015-16. That said, according to the same 2016 Report, we fell below the Citywide Average when it came to the Strong Family-Community Ties portion of The Framework for Great Schools (we had an 81% to the citywide average of 86%). ● Overall, 92% of the parents say school staff reach our regularly, but only 76% of the parents indicated they are involved based on the 2017-2018 School Environment Survey. Although the overall rating in Family And Community Ties is "Good," we would like to increase these percentages. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 1  By June 2019, all (100%) teachers will have communicated with parents on a regular basis, resulting in a positive school/parent/community relationship and increasing parent-teacher communication as measured by weekly entries in Skedula/Pupil Path, as well as attendance at PTA meetings, Parent-Teacher conferences, and parent-child events as demonstrated by a 5% increase in parent registration on Pupil Path and a 5% increase in parent attendance at all McKinley activities overall. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents will be informed of their child’s learning needs, Parents Sept. 2018-June, 2019 Administrators, Teachers assessment results, and attendance data through midpoint progress reports on a quarterly basis and by continually updating information on Skedula/Pupilpath. Become a member of the NYC Community Schools (through Parents the NYC Community School Grant in an effort to organize resources, share leadership, integrate social services, align resources with vision and purpose, in resulting in improved student learning, stronger families and family ties, and healthier communities. Hold school events that encourage parental participation Parents including: the spring and Winter Concerts, School Play, Parent-Child Workshops, etc. Reach out to all parents by developing themed PTA meetings Parents every month and also provide translated copies of all notices in Arabic, Chinese and Spanish. Parents have/will be supported in a social-emotional way by taking part in a series of workshops directed to improve their social-emotional well being: Inclusive of these workshops are "Mental Health 101" (September PTC) and "Mindfulness Training" (May Parent Engagement Day), by Manuel Molina, School Mental Health Consultant through the Office of School Health. Sept. 2018-June, 2019 Community School Director in coordination with Administrators, PTA President, Teachers, Parent Coordinator, website developer Sept. 2018-June, 2019 Administration, Teachers, Parent Coordinator Sept. 2018-June, 2019 Administrators, PTA President, Teachers, Parent Coordinator, website developer Parents Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administrative Team, Parent Coordinator, PTA President, and Office Of School Health Mental Health Consultant 3  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Currently, we have partnered with Heartshare Beacon as our CBO. Recently, we became part of a new initiative in that we are now recipients of a Community School Grant, otherwise known and referred to as "NYC Community Schools." "Community Schools are a strategy to organize resources and share leadership to integrate social services into the fabric of the schools. Community Schools align resources with vision and purpose resulting in improved students learning, stronger families and healthier communities. With that, one of our professional menu items for the upcoming year (similar to this year) is a Community Liaison. This person is responsible for reaching out to the community to invite community members to our school for the various functions we hold- day or night. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Remuneration for Administration, UFTTC Staff Developer, Teachers, Guidance Counselors, Parent Coordinator, and website designer ● School website ● Skedula/Pupil Path- an online communication and grading tool for teachers, parents, and students ● Funding through the 21st CCLC Grant (21st Century Community Learning Center) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February of 2019, (100%) teachers will have communicated with parents on a regular basis, resulting in a positive school/parent/community relationship and increasing parent teacher communication as measured by weekly entries in Skedula/Pupil Path as well as attendance at PTA meetings, Parent-Teacher conferences, and Parent-child events as demonstrated by a minimum of a 2.5% increase in parent registration on Pupil Path and a 2.5% increase in parent attendance at all McKinley activities overall. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument used to measure the progress towards meeting this annual goal will include monthly reports of Pupil Path parent registration, attendance records of all community and parent events at McKinley, and teacher outreach reports as measured on the Anecdotal Events page on Skedula. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Priority given to level 1 and level 2 students, ENL students, and SWDs All students falling within the state mandated median scale score between level 2 and level 3: (6th grade < 301) (7th grade < 302) (8th Grade < 300) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) ● Wilson- ● Small group ● During school A Decoding/ instruction ● During and After Reading/ ● Small group school Encoding/ Spelling, instruction ● After school and ● Small group ● During school ● Before school ● After school comprehension instruction program ● One-to-one ● IXL, Newsela, or iReady instruction ● Reinforcing Skills ● Small group in ELA for ELL instruction students ● Small group ● ELA Test Prep instruction ● NJHS Peer Tutoring ● Smallgroup 5  instruction ● 6th GradeENL newcomer class ● 7/8th Grade ENL Newcomer Class ●Transitional Bilingual instruction in Arabic ● ENL (6, 7, and 8) Intervention ● Title III Enrichment for ELA ● Remidiation ● Scaffolding strategies in the curriculum based on needs assessments from student inquiry with a 6  Mathematics Science Social Studies Priority given to level 1 and level 2 students, English language learners and students with disabilities Allstudents falling within the state mandated median scale score between level 2 and level 3: (6th grade < 301) (7th grade < 307) (8th grade < 304) Priority given to level 1 and level 2 students Priority given to level 1 and level 2 students, as well as students with disabilities and English language learners particular focus on students with disabilities ● Math Test Prep. ● Small group ● After school including regents instruction ●Title III enrichment ● Small group ● Math Remediation instruction ● After School ● Small group ●During school ● iReadyand iXL Instruction ● Whole class ● ILSE Test Prep ● Small group instruction ● After school ● SS/ESL ● Small group ● After school ● US Gov’t Regents instruction Test Prep ● Small group ●After school ● Scaffolding instruction strategies in the ● Whole group and ● During school curriculum based small group on needs instructions assessments from students inquiry 7  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Dependent on student needs as indicated on IEPs and 504 plans One to one, small and large groups according to activity One to one Small group or whole Group During School During School One to one Small group or whole group One to one During School During School with a focus on SWDs Guidance - Individual and Group Counseling in areas such as: goal setting, bullying, drug-prevention, coping skills, family issues, study skills, interpersonal concerns, self-esteem issues, anger management, classroom behavior, attendance improvement, high school applications. School Psychologist – Initiate resources provided for suspicion of children with learning delays; suggest techniques and methods implemented for children who are exhibiting ‘at-risk’ academic delays; recommend strategies to address academic difficulties; Suggest modified instructional strategies for children ‘at-risk’. SAPISWorker- SubstanceAbuse & Prevention Intervention Specialist 8  Social Worker - Provide parent education including parent rights about special education, the special education process, and special education services. Conducts social history interviews with parents for initial referrals. Nurse - Teach, administer and monitor medication, as well as provide counseling support for students with chronic conditions; supervision and teaching of intermittent urinary catheterization; management of insulin dependent diabetic with continual insulin therapy. 9  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Currently, we have 43 students listed as a Students in Temporary Housing, including students in shelters, students that are "doubling up," and students who are actually in Temporary Housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 0  As a school, we offer any "student in temporary housing" with the following accommodations: Full fair metro card Free lunch    An allotment of $100.00 for school supplies  A Knapsack (school bag)  Gym Uniform/McKinley t-shirt, shorts Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 1  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● Strategies we use to recruit Highly Qualified Teachers include using Open Hire, consultation with our District and Borough Field Support Liaisons, close supervision and analysis of our per diem staff members and attending recruitment fairs. Additionally, we have a connection with various colleges (Queens College, Brooklyn College, and College of Staten Island), based on the alumni that are currently working in our building. ● Careful attention is given to matching teacher qualifications with the needs of the school, so we are compliant with the Basic Education Data Survey (BEDS). If not, teachers are directed to take a HOUSSE survey. ● Teachers who do not have permanent certification are offered the opportunity to be reimbursed for course work that would lead to permanent certification in the area in which they are teaching (so long as they meet certain criteria of working in a high need area and for a certain period of time). ● We retain Highly Qualified Teachers by providing instructional support through various sources including mentoring through the UFTTC, PCT, and MTs, individualized teacher training, and Professional Learning Communities that meet every week. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ● Administrators, teachers, and paraprofessionals are surveyed and afforded opportunities for attendance at a variety of professional development workshops conducted by the DOE, Borough Field Support Center (BFSC), 2  District, UFTTC, and school based specialists which will hone their skills. No one is every turned down for wanting to attend professional development sessions in any of the aforementioned arenas. ● Additionally, CTLE (Continuing Teacher Leadership Education) accredited hours can be done in-house in conjunction with our UFTTC staff developer. ● Activities include Professional Learning in inquiry using The Framework for Great Schools, professional learning in creating rigorous instruction as outlined by The Framework, and professional learning tailored to meet the needs of ENL students (See 5A, Parts 2 & 3; 5C, Parts 2 & 3; 5D, Parts 2 & 3). Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. A team of teachers representing a variety of departments and grade levels meet (and continue to meet regularly) to assess and select the Measures of Student Learning (MOSL) for the school. Thus far, the team agreed that all teachers will be attached to the NYC Performance Task for their specific subjects (including ELA, Math, Science, & Social Studies), while all other teachers will be attached to the State Assessments- meaning that all state assessments will be attached to other subjects (Arts, Physical Education, Technology). For the upcoming 2018-2019 school year, the team 3  is also considering using all current, allowable State Assessments (including NYSAA, Regents, NYSESLAT, and ILSE), as we continue to strive for all teachers to be teachers of literacy, particularly with our high ENL and former ENL population. This team received professional development from a webinar in the Advance system, as well as professional guidance from the supervisor in charge of testing. Additional guidance was given by the UFT District Leader and the Teacher Development Coach for District 20. Professional development that is attended by the UFTTC and PCT is turn-keyed to the other teacher leaders that, in turn, disseminate to the rest of the staff. We triangulate data from state assessments (including the ELA/Math State exam and beginning of year MOSL assessment), teacher made embedded and culminating assessments, and the student work to pinpoint strategies to improve overall instruction and student achievement. This data-delving work is done during the inquiry process. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 1,266,999.00 0 32,078.00 0 11,387,432.00 X X 0 X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools 4 Column B Section Reference(s) Sections 4, 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E, 6 Sections 4, 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E, 6 0 Sections 4, 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E, 6  may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. 5   IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 6  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) The William McKinley Parent Involvement Policy was reviewed and adopted during the December 22, 2016 meeting of the School Leadership Team. Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 20K259, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Our school will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● As a school-wide program school, McKinley parents will be involved in decision making through active participation in the School Leadership Team and PTA. ● The Title I representative will report to the School Leadership Team on all Title I updates. 7  ● Continuous opportunities will be provided for parental involvement through guest speakers from community or cultural organizations at PTA Meetings, Title I, Special Education, Superintendent, and ENL orientation/update meetings. Meetings will be varied between mornings and evenings. Translators will be provided to reach all parents. ● The Parent Coordinator and Principal will ensure the timely communication of pertinent information through the school website, newsletters, Pupil Path, phone master system, and letters home. Our school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. Our school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of our school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, our school will: ● Providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● Provide parents with frequent reports on their children’s progress. Specifically, the school will provide reports as follows: three times annually through student report cards, and additionally through reporting of any test data, and through routine delivery of grades and other pertinent information via the online system called Skedula/Pupil Path. ● Provide parents reasonable access to staff. Specifically, staff will be available for consultation with parents as follows: consultation with teachers would be available during Parent-Teacher Conferences, during family engagement time every Monday from 7:40-8:35, or upon reasonable request.  Additionally, parents are provided with the opportunity to sign up for REMIND messages (a phone App that provides pop up text messages for parents to be informed about daily events at McKinley). Our school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● Participating, as appropriate, in decisions relating to my children's education. ● Respond to surveys, feedback forms, and notices when requested. ● Promoting positive use of my child's extra-curricular time. 8  ● Staying informed about my child's education and communicating with the school by promptly reading all notices from the school by mail or Pupil Path and responding as appropriate. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) 20K259, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● Provide high-quality curriculum and instruction in a supportive and effective learning environment that enables the participating children to meet the State’s student academic achievement standards as follows: by providing NYS Next Generation Standards-based instruction for all students including academic intervention services and enrichment. ● Implement a curriculum aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards and the NYS Next Generation Standards. ● Provide each parent timely notice when their child has been assigned or has been taught for four (4) or more consecutive weeks by a teacher who is not highly qualified within the meaning of the term in section 200.56 of the Title I Final Regulations (67 Fed. Reg. 71710, December 2, 2002). I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by:  Convening an annual Title I Parent Meeting at the beginning of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school's Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved.  Providing each parent an individual student report about the performance of their child on the State Assessment in Math, English Language Arts, Science (8th grade), NYSAA, and NYSESLAT.  Providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand.  Providing parents with timely feedback on student performance and communication via Skedula/Pupil Path. 9  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● On the request of parents, provide opportunities for regular meetings for parents to formulate suggestions, and to participate, as appropriate, in decisions about the education of their children. The school will respond to any such suggestions as soon as practicably possible. Additionally and with no appointment necessary, parents can come up to school on every Wednesday during our Parent-Engagement Time from 7:45-8:35. Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents  Creating a safe, supportive, and effective learning community for students and a welcoming, respectful  environment for parents and guardians. Sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration, and partnering with all members of the school community. Supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents.   Ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this compact and the Parent Involvement Policy.  Advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department's General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I Programs. II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: We, as parents, will support our children’s learning in the following ways: ● Monitoring attendance and lateness as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent. ● Making sure that homework is completed. ● Monitoring the amount of television my children watch, internet sites visited, and cell phone/electronic device usage and communications. ● Volunteering in my child’s school. ● Participating, as appropriate, in decisions relating to my children’s education. ● Respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested 0  ● Promoting positive use of my child’s extracurricular time. ● Staying informed about my child’s education and communicating with the school by promptly reading all notices and updates in Pupil Path from the school or the school district either received by my child, by mail or Pupil Path updates and responding, as appropriate. ● Serving, to the extent possible, on the PTA, School Leadership Team, policy advisory groups, such as being the Title I, Part A parent representative on the school’s Title I Policy Advisory Committee, the Community Education Council or other school advisory or policy groups. III. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities As a student, of William McKinley IS 259, I will share the responsibility to improve my academic achievement and work towards achieving the State’s high standards. Specifically, I will:  Attend school daily and arrive on time.  Complete my homework every day and submit all assignments on time and check Pupil Path daily.  Read at least 30 minutes every day outside of school time.  Give my parents or guardian who is responsible for my welfare all notices and information received by me from my school every day. Follow the School Rules.   All students must carry their official Student ID card.  Students must leave the following items at home, otherwise they will be confiscated: o Personal electronic devices, including but not limited to, iPads, iPods, MP3 players, cellular phones, and interactive watches.  Hats or headgear (except religious attire) are not to be worn in the building.  Beads or ‘colors’ are not worn in school.  Pajamas are not worn in school.   All students are to wear the school uniform shirt for all school trips. It is recommended that all students wear Flip-flops and slippers are not worn in school. the uniform shirt on a daily basis.  Do not post on the internet, or any electronic device any writing, images, and/or video taken in the school or during school functions (trips, dances etc.) of students, teachers, or school personnel.  Do not engage in any communications including texting or messaging on any electronic device on school grounds.  Do not post or send any inappropriate images, videos, or text on any electronic devices.  Do not engage in any cyber-bullying. At McKinley, we place academic studies and discipline issues ahead of any extra-curricular activity. Students who display improper behavior and/or actions against other students will receive strong disciplinary consequences. Any student who receives a Principal Suspension, a Superintendent Suspension or an arrest in regard to their actions against other students, members of the McKinley staff including volunteers, will be banned from all extra-curricular activities for a minimum of 3 months or the duration of the school year in which the incident occurred. Extra-curricular activities include, but are not limited to, senior functions, class trips, and grade trips. 1  2  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? Students at McKinley 259 will be programmed during the instructional day to receive a course focused on College and Career readiness. Approximately 600 7th grade students will engage in this endeavor through a Business Connections course taught by Success mentors . This course is designed to prepare students for life beyond college. The course work will include career planning, job interview skills, the importance of education to achieve success, communication and presentation techniques and to develop a career map. The knowledge our students will gain from this course will help support their understanding of career development and attain the tools they will need to achieve success in college and career. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. The goals for the Community School for this year is to : 1. Prepare students for College and Career 2. Support the emotional, social and mental well being of our students by forming partnerships with outside agencies. 3. Provide Academic Support for low achieving students 4. Provide Expanded learning Time for enrichment opportunities such as STEM and career exploration through after school programs 5. Target at risk students with low attendance by evaluating attendance data. We will target approx 600 7th graders for Business Connections at least 1 period per week We will target 150 6,7, 8th graders for after school enrichment and career opportunities. We will target 5-10 students per grade for truancy and provide supports We will target at least 25 students per grade for Academic Intervention after school Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? Our Community School Goals are well reflected in the goals set forth in our school CEP. It is the intention of the CS to provide the necessary support needed to help the overall school community through the Framework for Great Schools philosophy. We believe that the CS is a resource that is aligned to the needs of our students by helping the physical, social , emotional and academic well being of all of our students. We will strive to create a CS who's efforts 3  will provide students with the academic supports to bolster their critical thinking and writing skills to become 21st Century learners. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Creative Connections Vision education and Media L & G research and Evaluation Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment 600 7th grade students 75 6,7,8 grade students all students Goal see above College and Career STEM education see above Evaluation of grant see above Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The Community Partnership will use one full time Staff member from McKinley and two success coaches to implement their plan to instruct the 7th Grade students on the Business Connections Curriculum. Time has been provided to the success coaches, during the school day, to instruct the entire 7th grade- essentially, they have been programmed an actual class called Business Connections. With that, their are opportunities for students to get involved in after school programs that gear to STEM + A, Culinary Arts, Math, ELA, and Leadership programs. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside X 21st Century SIG Grant School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. 2. 4  3. 4. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. The CSD will work directly with our cabinet and will be an integral part of our team. The CSD will be responsible for aligning the CS goals with what our needs as a school are. We will work with our CSD to leverage our resources to provide the best opportunities for our students. We will listen to the CSDs ideas and concerns that are brought to the cabinet. We expect our CSD to be a collaborative part of our teams here at McKinley. The CSD will be instrumental with helping us support family engagement, coordinating social services and providing ELT for our students. With a large ENL population in our community it will be incumbent upon the CSD to provide supports for students and families that have specific needs due to language and cultural barriers. Through in-school and after school programming we will provide support for families that invite parents to be a vital part of strengthening school - community connections . This will be done through special events, workshops, trainings and meetings. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 1. Our CS partners( Creative Connections and Vision Education and Media) will be vital in offering our students college and career readiness and STEM. Creative Connections will provide Success Coaches to work with our 7th grade students throughout the course of the year on making Career Connections. VE will provide STEM opportunities after school. 2. Our CS Team will comprise of our Principal, CSD, Assistant Principal of CS/21st Century Grant, Assistant Principal of Attendance, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor. 3. The CSD will utiiize all data sources available to target students that are at risk. 4. The CSD will use ATS reports to evaluate patterns in students attendance. The CSD along with the AP attendance will target at least 5-10 students per grade at risk for failure due to low attendance in school. These reports are generated monthly and discussed at our Attendance team meetings. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. 5  We will program 7th grade students for a Business Connections class with Licensed Pedagogue along with a Success coach provided by our CBO. The CBO will provide all instructional resources necessary for this program. We will provide after school opportunities utilizing Licensed Pedagogue to conduct ELT with students in STEM, Culinary Arts , Math, ELA, Specialized HS Test Prep, and Leadership. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. The Instructional program will start on 9/18 and commence on 6/19. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 6  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 7  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: In compliance with Title III, ELLs are strongly encouraged to participate in the following supplemental programs: Weekdays – This program will be held after school on Mondays and Tuesdays and will begin in October 2018 and extend until April 2019. 1. Monday 1. ENL Enrichment (8th grade Arabic BiLingual) – taught in English, 1 1/2hrs., 1 day per week, by Bilingual Teacher (35hrs) a. Improve Reading, Writing, Listening and Speaking Skills through literature based instruction. b. Promote study and Learning strategies. c. Develop and facilitate ELLs English Language Acquisition. Students will be in one classroom in a group of 20 - 30 Arabic/Bilingual students 2. Literacy Based Math (6/7 grade) taught in English, 1 1/2 hrs, 1 day per week, Math Teacher (35 hrs) a. Improve Math literacy through Math instruction focusing on word problems. Students will be in one classroom with a Math content teacher in a group of 20- 30 6th and 7th grade ELLs. 2. Tuesdays & Thursdays ENL/ELA (8th) - taught in English, 1 1/2hrs , 2 days per week, by ENL Teacher (96Hrs) a. Improve Reading, Writing, Listening and Speaking Skills through literature based instruction. b. Promote study and Learning strategies. c. Develop and facilitate ELLs English Language Acquisition. Students will be in one classroom. The class will be taught in a team-teaching model with 30 students by an ENL teacher and an ELA teacher. Poetry in the Park taught in English, 1 1/2hrs , 2 days per week, by ENL Teacher (66Hrs) a. Improve Reading, Writing, Listening and Speaking Skills through poetry. b. Promote study and Learning strategies. c. Develop and facilitate ELLs English Language Acquisition. The culminating activity will take place on May 19th at the Narrows Botanical Garden in Bay Ridge, Bk. Students will be in one classroom with and ENL teacher in a class of 20 - 30 students. 8  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: 1. The goal of the professional development is to enhance teachers’ ability to use instructional strategies to support language acquisition and content area learning for ELLs. Activities will support pedagogical staff such as, Administration, ENL Teachers, Content Area Teachers, Guidance, Special Ed Teachers, Para Professionals, Psychologists, OT/PT therapist, speech, secretaries and parent coordinators, serving ELLs across academies. The professional development program is designed to build the capacity of teachers such as ENL and content area and implement coherent, effective instructional program for ELLs. Topics will focus on the following: • Identifying and placement of ELLs in compliance with Part 154 Regulations • Eligibility of ELLs to take mandated tests • Using ESL strategies in all content area • Scaffolding strategies in the content area • Implementing a standard-based instructional program • Literacy development for ELLs using scaffolding model • Differentiated instruction for ELLs • Evaluating the weaknesses and progress of ELL students using a variety of assessment techniques. • Promotional policies for ELLs All teachers working in the Title III Programs as well as other staff members will receive ongoing specific PD from the Teacher Team Leaders and UFT Teacher Center related to the Title III Program. Emily Riedman (Staff Developer) Naomi Lehrer (UFT Teacher Center) Dana Casil (ENL teacher) Dina Esposito (ENL teacher) PDs will take place after school, according to the needs of the staff. Teachers providing PD will attend outside PDs and Teacher Center provided PD and turnkey to other program members. All records (including attendance sheets and agendas) will be maintained and kept in the Title III binder. 2. Staff are supported by leadership and guidance counselors. Leadership provides professional development and guidance counselors provide intervention/mentoring for the needs of the students therefore supporting the staff. Guidance counselors articulate with the ENL liason in order to help meet the needs of the students. 3. All staff members have satisfied the 7.5/ 10 hours of professional development, though pd with the UFT center, coach. Attendance is taken and teachers receive a certificate stating that they have completed the mandated hours of ELL training. 9  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: 1. In September parents of ELLS are invited to a meeting along with the Principal- Janice Geary, Assistant Principal- Donna Nastasi, ENL coordinator - Sally Awad, ENL Teachers and the Parent coordinator. At this meeting parents are being informed about the instructional and supplemental programs for ELLs at McKinley. In December the school offers a second meeting to ELL parents where they communicate students progress with ENL Teachers, Parent coordinator - Diane Castignani, ENL coordinator, Assistant Principal and the Principal. Open House for 6th graders, programs and policies are explained with the help of translators. At High School night, guidance counselors explain and discuss, along with representatives from various schools who are present to introduce their programs and answer any questions parents may have. Translators are provided to assist the parents as well as the staff. To enhance an effective communication between ELL parents and the school community, all school/parent letters are translated. Translators are hired for parent teacher conference nights and PTA meetings. The ENL coordinator and the Assistant Principal/Director meet on a continuous basis. They collaborate and discuss ELL issues such as newcomers, placement of students, programming and strategies that will help our students to attain proficiency levels. In addition, monthly meetings are held with the Assistant Principal, ENL coordinator and the ENL teachers. Here they plan/discuss new initiatives, programs, AIS for our students. 2017-2018 Scheduled Workshops ELL Parent Orientation (September 26th) Celebration Breakfast for students who scored Commanding on the 2016-2017 NYSESLAT (October 18th) PTA Meetings (once per month -- every 3rd Thursday) topics covered will be: placement, testing, high school information, and more Parents are notified of these activities through backpacking, announcements on the school website (translated), and through PupilPath emails (translated in home languages). 3. Parents needs are evaluated through parent survey and questionnaires. 4. Parental involvement activities are addressed in collaboration with the outside agencies. The needs are accessed and we provide translation services and translation services are always available. All records, including agendas, attendance sheets and invitations in parents' preferred languages will be maintained and kept in the Parent Coordinator's office. 0 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 1  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 20 School Name William McKinley Borough Brooklyn School Number 259 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Janice Geary Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Sally Awad/ Dana DiCarlo Teacher/Subject Area Espie Antonacci/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Celeste Arrigo/ELA Related-Service Provider Sankar Singh Superintendent Karina Constantino Assistant Principal Donna Nastasi Coach type here School Counselor Elizabeth Madonia Parent Michelle Ngai Parent Coordinator Diane Castignani Field Support Center Staff Member Lucia Perez Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 5 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 1 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1768 2 Total number of ELLs 233 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 13.18%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Arabic If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 4 3 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 .5 7 .5 8 9 10 11 12 0 1 0.5 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? For placement purposes NYSITELL and SIFE Screener provides the proficiency level of the student. Once a student is placed in the appropriate class, content area teachers assess the student by individual subject areas. All ELLs students are assessed with the ELL periodic assessment. As part of the ELA curriculum, students are evaluated through embedded assessments(baseline, benchmark)and culminating tasks. When students return from summer vacation, all students including ELLs, are given writing assessments. All of these tools provide necessary feedback to teachers in order to differentiate their instruction. This data provides an insight of the ELL students strengths and weaknesses in the four different modalities of English. If a student performs at the entering or emerging level we know that their literacy and reading level is most likely not at grade level. Accordingly the teacher will be required to modify their lessons to ensure the improvement in the targeted skills. Afterschool programs are created to target students with weaknesses in a particular areas. Meetings are held (PLC) to 3  discuss the data, best strategies are told and shared that best fit the needs of the early literacy skills of our ELLs. Teachers who share the same students, meet often to discuss the needs of the particular students. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Teachers work cohesively during PLC's which in turn provide feedback for lesson planning assisting with student strength and weakness. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of programs for our Ells by focusing on whether or not our students have made progress or reached proficiency on the NYSESLAT as well as if they met AYP on the NYS Common Core ELA and Math exams. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once data is collected, teachers sit amongest themselves in PLC's, creating next steps for student progress. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. According to the data on the NYSITELL most students who have just entered the NYC department of education test at the entering or emerging level with few students who perform at a higher level. On the NYSESLAT, most of our students show a weakness in the reading/listening modalities. The NYSESLAT data also reveals that we have the most students performing at advanced or commanding in 8 th grade than the other grade levels. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Once we have collected the data, a committee reviews and assess where students need to be placed and then this information gets disseminated to all staff on the first few days of start up in September. Teachers and ENL committee meet on a continuous basis in order to help students who are at academic risk. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Students are grouped homogeneously by proficiency levels. The Entering/Emerging groups in each grade travel together as a group from class to class. Transitioning/Expanding ELLs and Commanding Ells are integrated in GE classes and also travel together from class to class. The two New comers classes are self-contained classes with two teachers as a stand alone model. One class is a 6 th /7 th grade bridge and the second is a 7 th /8 th bridge. b. TBE program. If applicable. This year IS 259 had an Arabic 6th/7th TBE Students followed the TBE protocols, 60/40 then 40/60 Arabic/English. c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 4  2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? In the past the instructional minutes were delivered as follows: - New Comers Class (Entering) – There will be 2 New Comers classes consisting of a 6th – 7th bridge class and a 7th - 8th bridge class. These students will remain in a self – contained class with a minimum of 360 minutes of ENL instruction. - Each grade has classes with ELLs at the Entering, Emerging. These classes receive 360 minutes of ENL. - Each grade also has classes of Transitioning/Expanding ELLs. These classes receive 180 minutes of ENL a week. These classes are integrated ENL. - All Former ELLs receive 90 minutes a week of ENL instruction. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All content area teachers use technology such as Smartboards, computers, audio visual, visual aids in order to help deliver the specific content and make it comprehendable to our students. All content area teachers, teach in English. Students are given glossaries as well as bilingual dictionaries in their native languages. ESL teachers provide content area support by introducing new vocabulary words in context and modify the instruction to attend to the needs of all of the ESL students in the class. The teachers of Transitoning, Expanding, and Commanding students follow the grade level ELA curriculum which includes some materials from Expeditionary Learning as well as teacher-created curriculum. The Entering and Emerging teachers follow a modified version of the grade level curriculum with a stronger focus on grammar. Homework is also modified to meet the needs of all the ESL students in the same class. Tiered activities are provoded according to the students proficiency level. All is done in alignment with CCLS. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? After identifying the native language, content are teachers provide translated tests for students, when necessary. In addition, some of our special education students have Bilingual Paras. Also, those students that are long term are looked at by the PPT team and if evaluation is needed it is done in the native language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status The goal of the LAP team is to ensure that the mandated units of ESL and ELA instruction are to be given to all ELLs, according to Part 154 Regulations. The instructional program of ELLs will be aligned with the ESL standards and the content area studies. Our ELLs need tremendous support in improving their reading and writing skills. a. SIFE students are identified after given an interview. SIFE students receive at risk intervention services during the day. These services include Cultural Literacy a technology based program specific to ELL students, at risk services with SETSS teachers, and guidance. All SIFE students are encouraged to participate in after school extra curricula programs. b. Newcomers are in 2 self-contained classes, in a 6-7 bridge program o 7-8 bridge program. These students receive instruction in a small group setting with two-teachers, and ESL teacher and a Content Area teacher. For those students in schools less than three years but more than one year receive instruction in a mainstremed classroom. c. Students who receive services 4 to 6 years are offered AIS. d. Long-term ELLs receive AIS with SETTS teachers. In addition, these students are strongly encouraged to attend all after school programs designed for them. e. Former ELLs are placed in the Advanced/GE classes so that they are still receiving the required mandated service for 2 years after reaching commanding on the NYSESLAT. They are also provided glosarries for in-class assessments and State exams. 5  6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELL-SWDs are provided instruction according to their IEP as well as according to the results of the NYSESLAT and periodic assessment. Students receive instructional strategies according to the data provided. The grade level materials are based on the curriculum for that grade including but not limited to novels, CCLS Ready Books, short stories and other materials. Students are provided with the same hand outs that are CCLS aligned, as GE students, however the lessons are modified to meet the students needs. Based on individual needs students may also be provided with native language materials such as a bilingual glossarie or translated notes/tests. There are also studensts that are SWD and are mandated to have bilingual have alternate placement paras. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELL-SWDs that meet the criteria of least restrictive environment are instructed with ESL instructional strategies through the content of English. Both ELA/ESL teachers team teach, they follow the same curriculum and students are provided with the same grade level material as GE students. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All intervention services are offered in English, with the help of bilingual dictionaries, bilingual glossaries and the buddy system. There is a tutorial program that all ELL students attend. Here they are provided with academic interventions according to the weakness of the individual student(Math, ELA, Social Studies, Science). Guidance teachers also work with students throughout the day, or at risk. During class instruction is modified to target the areas that need improvement. Students are offered after school programs as well as a Saturday Academy program to target the skills that need improvement in Social Studies. All instruction is data driven according to MOSL, and teacher made tests. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? This year we will continue to keep the pre exsisting programs. The 7th grade 8 ESL/ELA Team Teaching as well as two New Comers classes, a 6/7 and 7/8 bridge class as a result of the success the students in previous years had on the NYSESLAT>. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We are not discontinuing any programs/services for our ELLs since our new programs have been effective to the improvement of our ELLs making AYP and reaching proficiency. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. - At orientation night for the parents, all programs offered by the school are clearly described along with translations. Then letters are sent home inviting all student to participate in all before and after school activities. We expect parents to sign and return the consent form. - ELLS have equal access to all Performing Arts programs such as, Glee Club, Drama, Strings, Keyboard,Cheer Leading, Leadership Club, Champs, Scenic Design, High School test Prep, Special Ed test prep, Fashion Club, Flag Football and those students that are in the gifted and talented classes receive Spanish. ELLs who are interested in any program participate as every other child does . - In compliance with Title III ELLs are strongly encouraged to participate in the following supplemental programs: Weekdays – This program will be held afterschool on various days, beginning in October and extend until May. 1. Literacy Through the Arts – taught in English, 2hrs. one day per week a. Designed for ELLs with the purpose to improve Reading, Writing and Speaking Skills through the use of Accountable Talk. 2. New Comers Program - taught in English, 2hrs, one day per week. Saturday Academy – This program is held on Saturdays for 2.5 hours. The Saturday Academy will begin in October and extends until April. 6  1. Teaching English Through the content of Social Stdies a. Designed to prepare all ESL students for ELA/NYSESAT exams. 2. Literacy Through the Arts – taught in English a. Designed for ELLs with the purpose to improve Reading, Writing and Speaking Skills through the use of Accountable Talk. 3. The New Comers program- taught in English and designed for ELLs with the purpose to improve on the four modalities. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. ELLs have access to classroom computers in content area classrooms, they use text books as well as handouts and graphic organizers for re-enforcement and enrichment as needed. Each student has his/her own bilingual glossary to travel with from class to class. ELLs are also provided with native language translated editions of classroom tests for content areas such as Math and Science. They also use the online program Moby Max for individualized instruction in Math and ELA. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Currently our school offers ENL and TBE in Arabic. In our ENL classrooms home language is supported by using bilingual dictionaires, glossaries and the buddy system. The same material are used in content areas as well as the use of translated notes and exams for entering and emerging ELLs. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Each grade level curriculum is adapted/modified to include grade level tasks for ELLs and SWDS. All required resources are selected based on age and grade level appropriateness. For example in ELA a group of ELLs with SWDs will use the same short story as the rest of the 7 th grade, however they may use the abridged version or use a graphic novel as a supplement to the original text. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? ELLs have access to classroom computers in content area classrooms, they use text books as well as handouts and graphic organizers for re-enforcement and enrichment as needed. Each student has his/her own bilingual glossary to travel with from class to class. ELLs are also provided with native language translated editions of classroom tests for content areas such as Math and Science. They also use the online program Moby Max for individualized instruction in Math and ELA. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled ELLs have an orientation to tour the school with their teacher and there is a buddy system for newly arrived ELLS to become familiar with the school and its programs. New ELLs who enroll throughout the year are invited to participate in all activities during the school year, before, during and after the school day. These activities range from educationally based programs, such as tutorial, to the Arts and Sports. There is also a Parent Orientation Workshop run by the Assistant Principal, Donna Nastasi and the Parent Coordinator Diane Castignani. Please also refer to answer number 13. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Gifted and Talented ELLs are offered Spanish as an elective. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A 7  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 1. The goal of professional development is to enhance teachers’ ability to use instructional strategies to support language acquisition and content area learning for ELLs. Activities will support pedagogical staff such as, Administartioon, ESL Teachers, Content Area Teachers, Guidance, Special Ed Teachers, Para Professionals, Psychologists, OT/PT therapist, speech, secretaries and parent coordinators, serving ELLs across academies. The professional development program is designed to build the capacity of teachers such as ESL and content area and implement coherent, effective instructional program for ELLs. Topics will focus on the following: • Identifying and placement of ELLs in compliance with Part 154 Regulations • Eligibility of ELLs to take mandated tests • Using ESL strategies in all content area • Scaffolding strategies in the content area • Implementing a standard-based instructional program • Literacy development for ELLs using scaffolding model • Differentiated instruction for ELLs • Evaluating the weaknesses and progress of ELL students using a variety of assessment techniques. • Promotional policies for ELLs Calendar dates are TBD Teachers of ELLs are offered professional development on Monday mornings when they work with content area teachers and ELA teachers. They attend professional development workshops provided by the UFT teacher center. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Staff are supported by leadership and guidances counselors. Leadership provides professional development and guidance counselors provide intervention/mentoring for the needs of the students therefore supporting the staff. Guidance counselors articulate with the ESL liason in order to help meet the needs of the students. All staff members have are provided with 15% of their PD hours in ELL instruction during Monday morning Professional Development sessions and ENL teachers complete 50% of their PD hours in ELL instruction. Each teacher is provided with PD through pd with the UFT teacher center, the Network, and teacher led professional development workshops as well as worhshops attended outside of the building. Attendance is taken by the Assistant Principal and teachers receive a certificate stating that they have completed the mandated hours of ELL training. All professional development records are kept with the Assitant Principal of Organization, Anthony Debenedetto. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs are scheduled with individual teachers. Teachers discuss goals of the program and language proficiency assessment results at the initial conference. Later in the year, teachers meet with parents to discuss 8  their child's language development and progress as well as any specific needs in content areas. Interpretation and translation services are provided when needed in the parent's home language. Teachers also use Pupil Path to communicate with parents. Records are kept through attendance sheets for in person meeting, teacher phone logs for phone calls, and anecdotals on Pupil Path. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. (There was no field to respond to the previous question. Response to #2: Records are kept by the individual ENL teachers for annual individual meetings with ELL parents. Attendance records for Parent Teacher conferences are kept by School Secretary Debbie Grimley. Individual teacher outreach to parents is recorded by Individual teachers on Skedula. In September parents of ELLS are invited to a meeting along with the Principal, Assistant Principal, ESL coordinator, ESL Teachers and the Parent coordinator. At this meeting parents are being informed about the instructional and supplemental programs for ELLs at McKinley. The Parent Coordinator reaches out to ELL parents to invite them to these specfic events. In December the school offers a second meeting to ELL parents where they communicate students progress with ESL Teachers, Parent coordinator, ESL coordinator, Assistant Principal and the Principal. Open House for 6th graders, programs and policies are explained with the help of translators. Tour of the school. High School night, Guidance counselors explain and discuss high school choices, how to fill out an application, the dates and deadlines for submitting the applications. Representatives from various schools are present to introduce their programs and answer any questions parents may have. Translators are provided to assist the parents as well as the staff. To enhance an effective communication between ELL parents and the school community, all school/parent letters are translated. Translators are hired for parent teacher conference nights and PTA meetings. The ESL coordinator and the Assistant Principal/Director meet on a continuous basis. They collaborate and discuss ELL issues such as newcomers, placement of students, programming and strategies that will help our students to attain proficiency levels. In addition, monthly meetings are held with the Assistant Principal, ESL coordinator and the ESL teachers. Here they plan/discuss new initiatives, programs, AIS for our students as well as collaborate for major celebrations in our school such as “Chinese New Year”. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 9 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Janice Geary, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 0  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 20K259 School Name: IS 259 Superintendent: K. Costantino The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Nastasi Casil Donna Dana Assistant Principal ENL Teacher No Yes Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication include: Home Language Identification Surveys, ATS reports, Student Emergency Contact cards (Blue Cards), teacher created surveys, and the Language ID Card. As a result of these surveys we have identified that most parents share the same preferred languages which are Chinese, Spanish, and Arabic. There are a limited number of parents who prefer to be communicated with in other languages. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral The preferred languages for both written and oral communication in our school are: Chinese, Spanish, and Arabic. There are a limited number of parents whose preferred languages are: Urdu, Albanian, Russian, Turkish, Greek, and Bengali. English Chinese Arabic Spanish See Below See Below See Below See Below English Chinese Arabic Spanish 85.2 6.8 4.1 2.6 English Chinese Arabic Spanish 85.2 6.8 4.1 2.6 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? The Documents our school typically disseminates every year that require translation are: Families All information is distributed on a monthly or daily basis depending on school/teacher contact with the parents. Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. All documents that go home backpacked are translated through teacher service on staff. In addition any communication that is backpacked is also on the schools website and pupilpath, both of which have translation available. 3  Student Policy Handbook September Newsletters and Calendars – Throughout the entire school year Parent-teacher conference announcements After School Program Information Monthly At all PTA meeting held monthly we have in house translators. At all parent teacher conferences we hire LIS tranlations. We also use the NYC telephone translation. All documents that go home backpacked are translated through teacher service on staff. In addition any communication that is backpacked is also on the schools website and pupilpath, both of which have translation available. September, November, March, Class Trip Parental Consent Forms PTA Meeting Announcements/Letters Letters from School Leadership na na Monthly Throughout the school year Monthly Monthly At all PTA meeting held monthly we have in house translators. At all parent teacher conferences we hire LIS translations. We also use the NYC telephone translation. na na na na 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 4  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? All PTA meetings have translators for parents. All Parent Teacher Conferences, we hire LIS Translations. Over the phone Interpretation services In house translators or Over the phone Interpretation services In house translators or Over the phone Interpretation services The formal face-to-face meetings our school will typically have with parents throughout the school year are: a. Parent Teacher Conferences – September, October, March, and May b. PTA Meetings – Monthly c. ELA and Math Family Night – February and April d. Newcomers Welcome Meeting – September e. Anticipated Informal Interactions – Guidance Counselor, Nurse, and teacher phone calls home f. NYSESLAT Celebration Breakfast - September September through June September, October, March, May Monthly February, April September Daily September 5  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Our school has many staff members that are available to help out with all of our limited English proficient parents. If we have access to computers, then the school will post on the school website and pupil path, both of which translate for all languages. In the event of an emergency, we will still use all available staff members as well as the use of phone interpretation services. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. For the first faculty gathering/professional development, September 5, 2017, Assistant principal will provide all staff members with a review of the Chancellor's Regulation A-663 and send an electronic copy to staff as well. In addition, ENL coordinator will be providing on going professional development, beginning with student placement and then inquiry, focusing on our ENL students and movement. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) In order to fulfill parent notification requirements for translation and interpretation services, as per Section V11 of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 our school will provide parents with a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities in each parents’ preferred language. Our school will post a Multi-Lingual Welcome Poster at the entrance of our building indicating the availability of interpretation services in our building. Our school will use in-house staff for written translation and oral interpretation as well as an outside vendor –LIS, to meet the translation and interpretation needs of all parents’ with a preferred language other than English. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our school will use parent surveys to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services. 6 
