2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 13K266 School Name: M.S. K266 - PARK PLACE COMMUNITY MIDDLE SCHOOL Principal: GLENDA ESPERANCE 2018-19 SCEP-FF 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 2 Section 1: School Information Page School Information Park Place Community Middle School 13K266 331300010266 6-8 62 Park Place Brooklyn NY 11217 718) 230-1216 School Number (DBN): 718-857-2347 Fax: School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Phone Number: Glenda Esperance gespera@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Glenda Esperance Viola Scott Enrique Mina Viola Scott n/a n/a n/a District Information Geographical District: 13 Superintendent’s Office Address: ZinaCooper Williams Superintendent: 355 Park Place, Brooklyn, NY 11238 zcooper@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-636-3284 Phone Number: 718-636-3266 Fax: Brooklyn North FSC: Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: Bernadette Fitzgerald 2018-19 SCEP-FF 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, NY 11201- Room 501 Bfitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-225-5119 Phone Number: 718-935-4314 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Glenda Esperance Viola Scott Enrique Mina Viola Scott Barry BullardSr. Lisa Pierre *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ teacher Member/ Parent Member/Parent 2018-19 SCEP-FF 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) James Frederick Audra Ridikas Jason Hayes Tamiko Jackson Dawn Ramirez Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FF 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and informed by New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a 2018-19 SCEP-FF 7  comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality 2018-19 SCEP-FF 8  Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 9   Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Implement at least one USDE Turnaround Principle (e.g., redesign the school day, week, or year; modify the instructional program to ensure it is Evidence-based, rigorous, and aligned with State academic content standards; provide time for collaboration on the use of) beginning no later than the 2018-19 school year.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 10  1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: SCEP Overview Every day at Park Place is another opportunity to maximize a student’s potential as they move along their educational journey. We encourage our students to be determined to always give their best effort in all their classes! Our mission is to create an environment that promotes respect for racial and cultural diversity; to deliver rigorous academic curriculum; to utilize best practices for middle school level education; to utilize technological and community resources to increase opportunities for intellectual and social development; to develop well-rounded students through participation in the Arts. Every year, we reflect on our past practices in order to grow together and maintain a community in which every student can succeed. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Park Place Community Middle School 266 is a community school located in Park Slope, Brooklyn. We service grades 6-8 students. We cater to the needs of a wide array of students. We have students performing above grade level, students performing on grade level and students functioning below grade level. We are a Title I school and many our students qualify for reduced or free lunch. A large majority of our students are considered at-risk due to their academic social, economic and/or housing status. Members of our school community recognize that students enter middle school with varied strengths and weaknesses. Thus, our pedagogues collect and analyze data to align effective practices to meet the needs of all students. Data derived from formative and summative assessments are used to inform instructional practices and next steps. Teachers meet during common planning periods, team meetings, inquiry team meetings and lunch periods to discuss, develop and refine lessons and share best practices. Our school-wide goals were identified after a review of our internal data as well as The New York State Report Card, Quality Review, School Quality Guide, Advance- Measure of Teacher Performance Data, Learning Environment Survey. All goals were created to improve student outcomes and improve the quality of instruction provided by our staff. Professional Development is aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards and Danielson Framework for Teaching to infuse academic rigor and alignment of instruction to student progress. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We have a diverse population of learners. We have students that are exceeding and meeting state standards (Level 3 & 4's), students approaching and performing below state standards (Level 1 & 2 ), students with disabilities (SWD) and English language learners. (ELL). We have worked diligently to create an learning environment that is inclusive and accommodates the needs of all students. Over the past few years, the population of students performing at a Level 1 and Level 2 has increased. As a result, we have a greater amount of students with significant academic needs. Many of our students require extended day supports in addition to traditional supports rendered during the regular school day. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. We have done very well at establishing Strong Community Ties. Our to Key focus areas are Rigorous Instruction and Teacher Collaboration. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 11  5. Identify at least one USDE Turnaround Principle (e.g., redesign the school day, week, or year; modify the instructional program to ensure it is Evidence-based, rigorous, and aligned with State academic content standards; provide time for collaboration on the use of data) to be implemented in the 2018-19 school year. Teachers have common plan time embedded into their programs. They have also been provided with time to participate in Inquiry on an ongoing basis. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 13K266 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 160 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 6 7 6 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 24 24 8 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 84.0% % Attendance Rate 81.3% % Reduced Lunch 5.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.6% 15.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 4.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.08 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 32.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups - Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A YSH NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 26 26 91.9% 5.0% 37.5% 76.2% 2.5% 1.3% 2 27% 6.3 21.5% 27% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes YES N/A N/A N/A YES NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FF 13  2018-19 SCEP-FF 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed x x x x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Teachers meet collaboratively around the development of curriculum maps aligned to the CCLS. The curriculum maps and scopes & sequences across content areas used by our school reflect the CCLS. Our students and parents noted that across all major content subject areas, students are engaged in more reading and writing, using texts to support a position, and literary analysis than they were in prior years. According to our 2016- 2017 School Quality Guide, we met our targets in ELA in the categories of average student proficiency and average student proficiency -school's lowest performing third. The document also indicates that we met and exceeded our targets for the categories listed under the closing the achievement gap metrics in ELA. We are pleased about this improvement but recognize that there is still work to be done. Our teachers must continue to develop their abilities to consistently group students according to ability and promote higher-order thinking. There must be variation in the instructional activities for students performing above grade level. The instructional focus for the 2018- 2019 school year is to continue to differentiate instruction in order to make the curriculum accessible to all students with an emphasis on creating extensions for students performing at or above grade level. The goal is to have students receive instruction that matches their skill, levels of interests and talents in order to strategically increase their achievement In terms of mathematics, according to our 2016- 2017 School Quality Guide, we are approaching our targets in average student proficiency, average student proficiency- school's lowest third and the categories listed under closing the 2018-19 SCEP-FF 15  achievement gaps. During the 2017- 2018 school year, we used the aforementioned information to make adjustments to our mathematics scope & sequence, curriculum materials, programming and instructional supports. The instructional expectations for the mathematics department mirror those of the other content areas. Our teachers must develop their abilities to consistently group students according to ability and promote higher-order thinking. The instructional focus for the 2018- 2019 school year will be to continue the worked from 2018. We will continue to differentiate instruction in order to make the curriculum accessible to all students with an emphasis on having students receive instruction that matches their skill, levels of interests and talents in order to strategically increase their achievement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, All teachers will build capacity to align units of study with the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) as evidenced by lesson planning, student task and classroom observation resulting in a 50% increase in MOTP teacher ratings in components 3c and 40% increase in performance levels on the ELA MOSL. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff)  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teacher teams will meet on a consistent basis to collaboratively develop curriculum maps that will identify core content, educational activities, interventions, best practices and assessments . Administrators and teachers work together using the common core standards and results from unit assessments to identify gaps in student knowledge, trends and next steps. When necessary, adjustments to the curriculum maps are made to ensure that the needs of all students are being met. Parents will be invited to multiple curriculum night opportunities. In addition to the mandated Parent Teacher Conferences, we will invite parents to ELA, Math, Social studies and Science themed workshops to further discuss the instructional shifts as they relate to the CCLS. Parents received a copy of the class syllabus outlining the expectations of the course. Parents also have access to jupitergrades.com to track and monitor student progress. In addition to having an open door policy for parents, we have also implemented “Meet the Teacher Tuesdays’ so that parents feel welcome to come and ask teachers questions they may have around student learning. Special Education Teachers and ESL Teacher will participate in Mathematics and Literacy Teacher Team meetings to help monitor and track the academic progress of the SWD's and ELL's. During the meeting the teachers will identify trends and offer next steps. All teachers Administrators Ed Assistant Starting Sept. Admin Team Lead Teachers 2018- June 2019 Every Other Monday starting Sept. 2018- June 2019 All teachers Ed Assistant Administrators Admin Team Parents Weekly- Tuesdays Monthly All teachers Ed Assistant Starting Sept. Admin Team 2018- June 2019 Every Other Monday 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FF 17  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will hold monthly workshops focused on unpacking the curriculum in English Language Arts and Mathematics. We will also create parent curriculum guides for Math, Science, ELA & Humanities Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The key resources used to implement this activity will be Teachers, Lead Teachers, Administrators and District and BFSC Liaisons. This activity will begin in August 2018 and end in June 2019 Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA X Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, All teachers will build capacity to align units of study with the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) as evidenced by lesson planning, student task and classroom observations resulting in a 25% increase in MOTP teacher ratings in components 3c. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Feedback from the Quality Review Feedback and the Framework for Great Schools and Advance MOTP tracker Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? This tenet was an area of celebration on our 2017 Quality Review. The school community is safe according to parents, students, teachers and administrators. Students feel well cared for and motivated by staff to do their best. All members of the school community have someone to talk to if they have any concerns or issues that need to be addressed. We continually reached out to community partners to assist us in providing supports that will create a school environment that promotes positive social and emotional developmental health for all members of our school community. We will continue to implement the following initiatives: ● School physical environment improvement ● Advisory sessions dedicated to developing and encourage good study habits and students’ organizational skills. ● Student of the month celebrations by content area and grade level ● Continue providing students with activities that support Park Place Cares Community service team. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 19  ● Continue initiatives with Student Government to increase student voice ● Continue hosting Professional Development Opportunities w/Positive Conflict Management ● Social/Emotional Inquiry Team/Study Group ● Monthly school-wide trips ● Park Place Dollars Merit System ● Care Team Meetings ● Partnerships with non-profits ● On- site part time social worker Based on feedback from the 2018 Learning Environment Survey and 2017 Quality Review our school community sets high expectations for all stakeholders. According to our 2017- 2018 School Quality Guide, we met our target for creating a supportive environment. We will continue to build on that work create a system that supports positive social/emotional development. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound.  By June 2019, all students will participate in programs focused around social emotional development that will allow them to demonstrate progress towards achieving state standards as measured by feedback from the 2019 Learning Environment Survey. This will also be evidenced by a 25% decrease in incidents reported in OORS. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Develop staff’s ability to prevent disciplinary problems and develop a positive, collaborative school culture conducive to academic achievement. Staff members facilitate grade team meetings that solve problems that stand in the way of student learning. Advisory Program is organized on grade level teams, providing additional structure and support. Create systems and structures for student accountability including monthly reward incentives. Analyze cohort data and track trends and patterns by cohort. Use Advisory program in an authentic way to foster positive emotional and social development and relations. All students All Parents Priority will be given to students classified as at- risk Sept. 2018- June 2019 Twice a month Admin Team, Guidance, Social worker, School Psychologist, Attendance Teacher and Advisory Teachers Anticipated Outcome: ● Build community in every grade team and ensure that teachers have resources to create a rich and welcoming learning environment. ● School wide trips and activities organized around a community theme. ● Launch Student Led Conferences System ● Monthly parent theme nights ● Create Schoolwide Park Place Dollars Merit System We will also increase parental involvement in regards to social and emotional development by continuing our open door policy. Parent Coordinator and SLT will work collaboratively to host events such as, Family Art Day, Family Fitness Day, Science Night, Parent workshop for ESL students, Special Education centered workshops and Positive conflict management with a middle school student All parents Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Priority will be given to grades 6 and 7 students Monthly Parent Coordinator SLT Parents Teachers Admin 2018-19 SCEP-FF 21  Professional Training in Restorative Approaches so that staff are trained in Fostering Students' Social Emotional Learning through Be the Change Curriculum teachers Nov. 2018- June 2019 Administrators, Guidance and Social Worker Provide professional development training to at least 10% of professionals and non-professionals regarding Restorative Approaches. Four staff members will attend the training and then they will turn key information to the rest of the school community. We will partner with outside organizations that will hold student classroom level workshops and schoolwide assemblies around character building and student leadership. Teachers students Oct. 2018- June 2019 Administrators, Guidance and Social Worker ed assistants guidance 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will host monthly parent meetings based on topics derived from parent surveys taken at the start of the school year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administrators, Teachers, Lead Teachers, Students and Parents. This activity will begin in September 2018 and will end in June 2019. Violence Prevention Grant Programs 3 days a week. Arts Connection provided by OSYD/SONYC Grant M-F from September 2018- June 2019. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all students will participate in programs focused around social emotional development that will allow them to demonstrate progress towards achieving state standards as measured by feedback from the 2018 Learning Environment Survey. This will also be evidenced by a 15% decrease in incidents reported in OORS. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 22  OORS reporting system, workshop attendance sheets, school created learning environment surveys. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed x x 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. x 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our teachers use curriculum maps to focus on the concepts that are prioritized in the CCLS and to identify instructional connections within and across grade levels. Our teachers are also using lesson plans and data to inform grouping and multiple points of entry. However, differentiated Instruction is used to address the needs of only the low performing students, and grouping is not always based student need or ability. Although our student have consistently displayed progress ( as per our 2014 through 2016 School Quality Guides), for the 2017- 2018 school year our school will continue to focus on planning instructional activities and analyzing data to increase the achievement outcomes for lower performing students and pay extra attention in creating extension opportunities that provided activities to address the needs of our higher performing students. We have partnered with several professional development programs to assist us with the process of strengthen pedagogical practices. Some of the programs are as follows: Teacher Incentive Fund (TIF) , Middle School Quality Initiative (MSQI), Urban Advantage, Facing History and Brook North Field Support Office. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 24 By June 2019, 100% of Teachers will deepen the inquiry process through the analysis of data in response to student learning as evidenced by a 50% increase in Danielson's Components 3c, and 3d. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 25 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All Teachers Every monthly Admin Team Ed Assistant Lead Teachers Admin Team District Support Sept. 2018- June 2019 Field Borough Office Support NYC DOE approved Consultants Admin Team Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teacher will meet on a consistent basis to collaboratively develop curriculum maps that will identify core content, educational activities, interventions, best practices and assessments . Administrators and teachers work together using the common core standards and results from unit assessments to identify gaps in student knowledge, trends and next steps. When necessary, adjustments to the curriculum maps are made to ensure that the needs of all students are being met Inquiry Teacher Teams All Teachers Every two weeks Teams are led by Peer Instructional Coaches and Demonstration Teachers and are comprised of 5 -8 teachers from various content areas to offer varied perspective. Each group also has a special education teacher assigned to the team. ESL Teacher will be assigned to the Literacy team. Ed Assistant Lead Teachers Admin Team Sept. 2018- Inquiry Team #1- Literacy Inquiry Team #2 – Mathematics Inquiry Team #3 – Social Development Anticipated Outcome- June 2019 • Develop skills to facilitate effective analysis of student work using protocols. • Analysis of student work and assessment for the purpose of differentiation & accommodation to curriculum. Common Planning All Teachers Weekly Admin Team Admin Team Lead Teachers 2018-19 SCEP-FF 26  Instructional leaders, Teachers, Assistant Principal, Principal, and District Points (when available) collaborate weekly. Sept. 2018 - June ● Analysis of student work and assessment ● Design rubrics to score performance tasks. ● Faculty Collaboration Evidence of alignment to CCLS across classrooms 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2019 How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will create a parent curriculum guide that will serve as resource to parents. This packet will be distributed at the beginning of the year. We will also host monthly workshops that will allow parents to unpack the ELA and Mathematics Curriculum. We will also host monthly workshops on Jupiter' Grades, our online grade book, to help parents monitor student progress and actively communicate with parents. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The key resources used to implement this activity will be Teachers, Lead Teachers, Administrators, Field Borough Liaisons and District 13 Liaisons. This activity will begin in September 2018 and end in June 2019 Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all students will be exposed to at least two units of study in Math, ELA, Science and Social Studies that are rigorous, tiered and differentiated to address a variety of levels. Teachers will deepen the inquiry process through the analysis of data in response to student learning as evidenced by a 30% increase in Danielson's Components 3c and 3d. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Agendas, Classroom Observation Reports, Student Assessment Data, Feedback from Student Led Conferences 2018-19 SCEP-FF 27  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. x x x 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. All leadership decisions are centered on student achievement. We follow a shared leadership model and distribute leadership within the school to maximize talent. We make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human and fiscal capital resources. We are a small school. As a result, we are constantly looking for ways to maximize all the human resources in our organization by empowering staff and giving them an opportunity to take leadership positions in their areas of expertise. Areas such as Stem, Arts Education, Literacy, Mathematics, Special Education and Humanities. At the start of the school year, school administrators meets with staff individually to set goals and identify areas of strengths and areas of development based on the prior year’s observation data. After the areas for professional learning have been identified, an individualized professional development plan is collaboratively created. Throughout the year, appropriate follow- up meetings are scheduled to review progress and take corrective action if necessary. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 29  We take advantage of the professional development opportunities provided at no cost through the NYC Department of Education such as BFSC- North Offered Course, STEM Department, MSQI, Arts, Health and Wellness We also utilize resources provided on a district level. Our district has created inter-school visitation opportunities as an avenue to share resources and best practices. We are able to collaborate with schools in the district with similar needs and visit model schools that have demonstrated consistent success. Our district’s ADVANCE coach also visits school to ensure that the administrative team members are normed and calibrated in using the Daniels Framework for teaching rubric effectively. Finally, we work collaboratively with staff to seek out grant opportunities. As a result, we have applied and received grants to support our professional learning . One of our past grant opportunities include the Teacher Incentive Fund Initiative (TIF) . This program provided us with funding to establish two new teachers roles- Peer Instructional Coach (PIC) and Demonstration Teacher (DT). Teachers in these roles participate in PD that focus on helping other teachers in the building improve their practice aligned to the citywide instructional expectations, including implementation of the Danielson Framework and Common Core-aligned curriculum, as well as on facilitative leadership skills. We have already had our PICs and DT model and share best practices around instructional topics on assessment and inquiry. The school also received additional support from a Teacher Effectiveness Coach that worked closely with teachers throughout the school year. We have also received professional learning funding form grants provided Facing History Grant, DR K-12 Poly tech Robotics and Urban Advantage. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will demonstrate improvement in teaching practices as evidenced by a 50% increase on their MOTP in components 1e and 3c resulting in an increase in ELA and Mathematics State assessment proficiency rates. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Inter-visitations Administrators On-going through Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Admin Team and Instructional leaders and District Point and Field Borough Supports Observe teachers through the lens of Danielson’s framework with a keen focus on Competencies in Domains 1, 3 and 4 with an emphasis on designing coherent instruction, student engagement, assessment and questioning and discussion. Anticipated Outcome ● Structured professional conversation ● Sharing best practice ● Building community and leadership capacity School administrators meets with staff individually to set goals and identify areas of strengths and areas of development based on the prior year’s observation data. After the areas for professional learning have been identified, an individualized professional development plan is collaboratively created. Throughout the year, appropriate follow- up meetings are scheduled to review progress and take corrective action if necessary. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement out school year Sept. 2018- June 2019 Teachers Ed Assistants on- going Sept. 2018- June 2019 Administrators Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly SLT meetings, PTA parent executive boards , Title 1 meetings and town halls Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 31  The key resources used to implement this activity will be Teachers, Lead Teachers, Administrators, Field Borough Liaisons and District 13 Liaisons. This activity will begin in September 2018 and end in June 2019 Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, teachers will demonstrate improvement in teaching practices as evidenced by a 25% increase on their MOTP in components 1e and 3c resulting in an increase in ELA and Mathematics State assessment proficiency rates. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Agendas, Classroom Observation Reports, Student Assessment Data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 32  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We reviewed a variety data sources to assess our effectiveness in building strong family and community ties. According to our 2017 Quality Review Report, student academic progress and social emotional growth is encouraged by a school culture that fosters commitment and engagement by family, school and community stakeholders. Data provided by the 2017- 2018 School Quality Guide indicate that we exceeded the targets set for strong family and community ties. The 2018 Learning Environment Survey reveals that our parents responded positively to questions related to parental outreach an parental involvement. Furthermore, parent response to questions relating to building strong family and community ties averaged above a score of 90% positive. As a result, we will continue to implement the following: · Parent training on State Standards · Monthly Parent Theme Days · Attendance meetings · Host School wide Student Led Conferences- 2 session 2018-19 SCEP-FF 33  · Provide parents with frequent reports on their children’s progress. Specifically, the school will provide reports as follows: Progress Reports monthly, quarterly report cards · Provide parents reasonable access to staff · Utilize an online grade book, Jupitergrades, which allow students and parents check their current grades, homework and academic progress online anytime Maintain school website · During preparation periods teachers conduct- conferences, telephone calls · School-wide/Grade Meetings · Quarterly mailings · Distribute quarterly newsletters · Jupitergrades Parent Training · Individual parent conferences upon request · Meet Your Teacher - Curriculum Conferences - Provide parents opportunities to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities as follows: Multicultural Feast, School Leadership Team, PTA, Volunteers-Lunch-Monitors, Chaperone, for trips and school social events, Open House, Career Day, Guest Speakers. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 25% increase in parental involvement in school activities addressing both the academic and social needs of their children as evidence by attendance sheets and program feedback forms. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 34  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Facilitate Workshops and meetings to share best practices that will help improve quality of students’ achievement. Insure delivery of one cohesive message that supports the strengthening our school community. Parents and Guardians Anticipated Outcome: ● Sharing best practice, tools, and feedback from meetings. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Parent coordinators, Guidance, Social Worker and Teachers Monthly meetings Morning and evening sessions & Tuesdays Sept 2018- June 2019 ● Building leadership capacity ● Increase student performance ● Increase parent voice Parent Coordinator and PTA Executive Board will meet and collaborate on workshop topics. They will identify parent needs in order to ensure that planned workshops and meeting are purposeful and time Parents will be given the opportunity to meet with Special Education Liaison for support around the IEP process prior to the mandated annual review date. ENL parents will be given the opportunity to meet with the Parent Coordinator and ENL Coordinator on an ongoing basis for assistance with addressing their child's academic and social emotional needs. Parents, guardians Monthly meetings Administrators and Parent Coordinators Parent coordinator Parents, Parent Coordinator Special Education Teacher Parents, Parent Coordinator, ESL Coordinator Sept 2018- June 2019 Tuesdays and ongoing Sept 2018- June 2019 ongoing Sept 2018- June 2019 Special Education Liaison, Administrators and parent coordinators ENL Coordinator, Administrators and parent coordinators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FF 35  If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 2 -Family Literacy workshops for our parents, Artsconnection hosts 2 Family Day Events Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent Coordinator, Administrators, Teachers, Students and Parents Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 15% increase in parental involvement in school activities addressing both the academic and social needs of their children as evidence by attendance sheets and program feedback forms. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent attendance records. A comparison between 2017-2018 and 2018- 2019 Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 36  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group, one to one, tutoring During the day and Afterschool Small group, one to one, tutoring During the day and Afterschool Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Priority will be given to students Performing at a Level 1 and Low Level 2 Mathematics Priority will be given to students Performing at a Level 1 and Low Level 2 Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Direct instruction to small group during AIS periods One-to-one tutoring. . Materials for specific skill practice include Common Core task from American Reading Company and Teacher Created Materials Common Core Curriculum Associates Extended Day and Saturday Academy Direct instruction to small group during AIS periods One-to-one tutoring using One-to-one tutoring using I- Ready Instruction. Materials for specific skill practice include Common Core Workbooks from Curriculum Associates Extended Day and Saturday Academy 2018-19 SCEP-FF 37  Science Priority will be given to students Performing at a Level 1 and Low Level 2 Social Studies Priority will be given to students Performing at a Level 1 and Low Level 2 At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Priority will be given to students identified as being at- risk Direct instruction to small group during AIS periods One-to-one tutoring using One-to-one tutoring. Materials for specific skill practice include Common Core Workbooks from Curriculum Associates Extended Day and Saturday Academy Direct instruction to small group during AIS periods One-to-one tutoring using One-to-one tutoring.Materials for specific skill practice include Common Core Workbooks from Curriculum Associates Extended Day and Saturday Academy One-to one and small group service are provided to students during lunch period by part-time guidance counselor or social worker. Small group, one to one, tutoring During the day and Afterschool Small group, one to one, tutoring During the day and Afterschool Small group, one to one, tutoring During the day and Afterschool 2018-19 SCEP-FF 38  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) As of August 2018, we currently have 15 students in temporary housing currently enrolled at our school 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Our students in temporary housing will receive customized services that will meet both their academic and social needs. The services that will be provided to these students are as follows: School supplies and instructional materials, uniforms, AIS services, Extended Day programs, at- risk non mandated counseling, additional snacks and transportation passes Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 39  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 SCEP-FF 40  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 85% of staff are tenured. 100% are teaching in their designated license area. In order to recruit highly effective teachers we thoroughly vet all our teaching candidates. Potential candidates are required to participate in a demo lesson, submit a sample of student work, teacher created lesson plan, at least two evaluations and a list of 3 professional and personal references. In order to retain and support the professional development of high qualified staff, administration works with the teachers to create customized professional development plans that meet the needs of the individual teachers. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ● Tailor our professional development plan to address the needs of all our community stakeholders- administrators, teachers, students and parents. Some professional development topics include- Analyzing Data, Effective Lesson Planning, Support around strengthening content knowledge, Differentiation, Student Engagement and Classroom management. ● Bi- weekly meetings with Administrative Team to share and analyze students’ work to best practices and share effective instructional strategies to improve student outcomes ● Teacher teams will meet on a consistent basis to collaboratively develop curriculum maps that will identify core content, educational activities, interventions, best practices and assessments . Administrators and teachers work together using the common core standards and results from unit assessments to identify gaps in student knowledge, trends and next steps. When necessary, adjustments to the curriculum maps are made to ensure that the needs of all students are being met Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 41  n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. ● Bi- weekly meetings with Administrative Team to share and analyze students’ work to best practices and share effective instructional strategies to improve student outcomes ● Teacher teams will meet on a consistent basis to collaboratively develop curriculum maps that will identify core content, educational activities, interventions, best practices and assessments . Administrators and teachers work together using the common core standards and results from unit assessments to identify gaps in student knowledge, trends and next steps. When necessary, adjustments to the curriculum maps are made to ensure that the needs of all students are being met. Teachers meet with school administration to create an assessment calendar outlining the dates and various types of schoolwide assessments that will be offered during the school year. ● Monthly School Leadership Team Meetings 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 42  Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local $ 121,175 $16,979 $ 53,191 0 0 0 $ 1,433,096 Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 43   Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 44  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 13K266, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students PPCMS will support parents and families of Title I students by: • Provide parents with frequent reports on their children’s progress. Specifically, the school will provide reports as follows: Progress Reports, quarterly report cards • Provide parents reasonable access to staff. • Utilize an online grade book, Jupiter grades, which allow students and parents check their current grades, homework and academic progress online anytime • Create school website • During preparation periods teachers conduct- conferences, telephone calls • School wide/Grade Meetings 2018-19 SCEP-FF 45  • Monthly mailings • Distribute quarterly newsletters • Host Parent Link training for parents • Jupiter grades Parent Training • Parent Coordinator serve as Liaison • Individual parent conferences upon request • Meet Your Teacher- Curriculum Conferences • Parent Workshops during the evening and during the school day • Provide parents opportunities to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities as follows: Multicultural Feast, School Leadership Team, PTA, Volunteers-Lunch-Monitors, Chaperone, for trips and school social events, Open House, Career Day, Guest Speakers PPCMS’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. PPCMS community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of our school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys, feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, our school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and 2018-19 SCEP-FF 46  inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before October 30th of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; PPCMS will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 47  13K266, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 2018-19 SCEP-FF 48  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 49  ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 50  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 13 School Name Park Place Community Middle Schoool Borough Brooklyn School Number 266 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Glenda Esperance Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Tracy Gregory Ellis/ ELA Related-Service Provider Cheena Mitchell/Speech Superintendent Barbara Freeman Assistant Principal Brenda Lee Coach School Counselor Jennifer Denton Parent Tryshell Mark Parent Coordinator Shanise Cardona Field Support Center Staff Member Bernadette Fiztgerald Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FF 51  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 130 Total number of ELLs 3 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 2.31% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Early literacy skills are assessed using the DRP diagnostic first and then running records. This assessment provides insights into reading comprehension weaknesses. The results are used to inform instructional practices regarding reading skill needs for all three grade levels. In addition, teacher-created assessments are implemented in order to identify the strengths and weaknesses of English Language Learners in the four language modalities (listening, speaking, reading, and writing) The assessments serve in aiding instruction by helping to develop instructional plans and creating teacher and student goals to meet the linguistic, cultural and educational needs of all ELLs. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 SCEP-FF 52  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Through active monitoring, the ENL teacher and content teachers confer throughout the year to discuss the specific needs of ELLs in their content area classes. Based on those meetings, appropriate strategies are determined and implemented to help the students access the content. In addition, throughout the year the ELLs receive formal teacher-created assessments to track their progress in acquiring and strengthening their language skills in all four modalities. At the end of the year NYSESLAT score is compared to the NYSITELL and are analyzed to evaluate the success of each student. The school administration also uses this information to make informed classroom visits and reviews student scholarship data to support teachers in their instructional best practices. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Based on the results of the NYSITELL between the 2013-2014 and 2015-2016 school year. The data reveals that all of the students displayweakness in reading and writing. Two out of the three ELL students received their best scores, in listening and speaking on the NYSESLAT. One students received very low scores for all four language modalities listening, speaking, reading, and writing. NYSITELL. Across all grade leevels, the data suggests that vocabulary acquistion is needed to assist the students in becoming more proficient in reading and writing. The data also reveals that with on going consistent acadmic support students will make greater strides from year to year on the NYSESLAT on all grade and proficiency levels. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The goal of our ENL program is to foster full English proficiency in a supportive classroom environment. Instruction is delivered in both a Stand-Alone ENL model and Integrated ENL model of 50 minutes periods with small groups of no more than six students over two consecutive grade levels, who are also on the same language proficiency level. Students follow the same curriculum as monolingual students and the ENL teacher collaborates with the monolingual to share assessment data and next steps. This provides the students, preparation for transition to monolingual settings. During specified teaching periods the ELA and ENL teacher have collaborate. The ENL teacher will push-in as needed to fulfill each students required minutes as mandated by CR-Part 154 to provide support and scaffolds for the ENL students in their content area classes. In order to ensure that the mandated instructional period 2018-19 SCEP-FF 53  of time is provided according to proficiency levels, the ENL teacher is provided the data showing each student’s NYSESLAT scores and corresponding mandated requirement of instructional time. The ENL teacher creates the ENL schedule collaboratively with school administrators to ensure compliance. Students at the following levels: Entering (formerly known as Beginning), Emerging ( Low Intermediate), Transitioning (formerly known as Intermediate), and Expanding (formerly known as Advanced) receive 360, 360, 180, and 180 minutes respectively of ENL instruction which includes ENL instruction in Literacy and content areas per week. Students at the Commanding (formerly known as Proficient) level receive two 50 minute periods, totaling 100 minutes of ENL instruction per week. ENL instruction utilizes hands-on activities and use of graphic organizers in small groups. The Integrated Model provides mandates for students according to their proficiency levels/grades. The ENL teacher provides support in the integrated class using small group previewing lessons, strategies/methodologies using the four modalities. Content teacher and ENL teacher collaborate to make content instruction consistent and accessible. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The goal of our ENL program is to foster full English proficiency in a supportive classroom environment. Instruction is delivered in both a Stand-Alone ENL model and Integrated ENL model of 50 minutes periods with small groups of no more than six students over two consecutive grade levels, who are also on the same language proficiency level. Students follow the same curriculum as monolingual students and the ENL teacher collaborates with the monolingual to share assessment data and next steps. This provides the students, preparation for transition to monolingual settings. During specified teaching periods the ELA and ENL teacher collaborate. The ENL teacher will push-in as needed to fulfill each students required minutes as mandated by CR-Part 154 to provide support and scaffolds for the ENL students in their content area classes. In order to ensure that the mandated instructional period of time is provided according to proficiency levels, the ENL teacher is provided the data showing each student’s NYSESLAT scores and corresponding mandated requirement of instructional time. The ENL teacher creates the ENL schedule collaboratively with school adminitrators to ensure compliance. Students at the following levels: Entering (formerly known as Beginning), Emerging ( Low Intermediate), Transitioning (formerly known as Intermediate), and Expanding (formerly known as Advanced) receive 360, 360, 180, and 180 minutes respectively of ENL instruction which includes ENL instruction in Literacy and content areas per week. Students at the Commanding (formerly known as Proficient) level receive two 50 minute periods, totaling 100 minutes of ENL instruction per week. ENL instruction utilizes hands-on activities and use of graphic organizers in small groups. The Integrated Model provides mandates for students according to their proficiency levels/grades. The ENL teacher provides support in the integrated class using small group previewing lessons, strategies/methodologies using the four modalities. Content teacher and ENL teacher collaborate to make content instruction consistent and accessible. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The content areas are delivered in English, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible and to enrich language development, MS 266 has adopted a Balanced Literacy approach in the instruction of content areas. Students are provided with the opportunity to do read-alouds, shared and independent reading. The writers workshop model is also implemented, and students are knowledgeable about the writing process. Students maintain a writing journal. Furthermore, scaffolding is an essential part of the instructional delivery, such as Modeling, Graphic Organizers, Bridging/Building Background Knowledge, Schema Building, Contextualization, Text Representation and Metacognition. Students are also assisted during work periods and conference with their teachers in and out of class. Informal assessments are administered, as well. Additional small group AIS sessions for each grade prior to all state assessments are offered to focus 2018-19 SCEP-FF 54  on literacy and academic language. In order to maximize language acquisition for ELLs, the ENL teacher and classroom teachers work closely to deliver literacy instruction as well as tailor additional content instruction to meet the needs of the ELLs. The ESL teacher also assists in the acquistion of language using the supporting materials ( Continental books) on to assist the ESL students in achieveing success in the Common Core Curriculum. Students use dictionaries and glossaries to support vocabulary development activities. Classroom libraries which celebrate the multilingual and multicultural students in our program are available in the ESL class. The ESL teacher uses the DOK and patterns the questions aligned common core learning standards. Students receive content arbvxcea instruction from monolingual teachers who incorporate ESL strategies throughout the day. All students participate in hands-on experiments and projects, cooperative group work, and visuals to support learning and make the content comprehensible and enrich language development. ELL students receive two periods of ELA Academic Intervention Services per week and are encouraged to participate in our afterschool and Saturday school programs. Our plan includes individual plans to facilitate the growth of students in the modalities that they must master in order to attain ‘Proficient’ level on the NYSESLAT and then transition into a monolingual program. Teachers consistently analyze the data to address the academics needs of these students and provide differentiated instruction to support growth in academic vocabulary and written language. In addition, teachers focus on developing higher order thinking skills to enhance their reading comprehension skills. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Instructional resources such as workbooks, glossaries and software is being purchased in students native language 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Differentiation throughout the ELL program is done through a varied content of assignments and reading materials. Students are given different text covering the same topic as well as varied leveled assignments. All students focus on learning academic vocbulary, reading and comprehension skills, listening, reading and writing with understanding, and facts and details. Regarding the SIFE population, there is an urgency to provide academic intervention services as an extension to the regular school program on both push-in and pull-out services. The following interventions are also implemented: --Making an individualized student needs assessment. --Grade and age appropriate instructional support materials. --Differentiation of instruction in all areas to help students achieve their IEP goals (when applicable), in addition to meeting State learning standards as it relates to the NYS Common Core Standards. - increased intergration of technology. The school provides the following resources to facilitate the transition of Newcomers: --An orientation session for incoming new students. --A buddy system identifying a similar student in his/her class who will assist the Newcomer during the day. --Utilization of the American Reading Company Program. --Encourage students to participate in Academic Intervention programs such as AIS, afterschool programs, peer tutoring programs, and the American Reading Company Program. increased intergration of technology. The instructional plan implemented for ELLs receiving service 4 to 6 years is one that will allow them to demonstrate growth in the acquisiton of the second language and, make annual progress in their state ELA and math exams, and achieve academically in all their content area classes. That is, beyond explicit ESL instruction, collaboration between teachers will ensure that the 2018-19 SCEP-FF 55  language needs of the ELLs are taken into consideration. Some aspects of this policy include: --ELA and other content area teachers monitor the understanding of linguistically challenging material and use a variety of phrasings and synonyms to clarify meaning. --Math teachers support students in understanding difficult word problems, and require students to make verbal explanations of the problems they work on. --Humanities teachers scaffold their instruction with visual aids such as maps, atlases, and illustrations to increase comprehension. Although we do not currently have any long-term ELLs (those ELLs having completed 6 years of ESL), the plan for them is to analyze their NYSESLSAT scores, as well as those of their ELA and Math assessments, to identify their problem areas. Past analysis has revealed a deficiency in both reading and writing. Our action plan for this subgroup involves: --Monitoring the progress of students in all content areas to differentiate instruction for literacy needs. --An individualized intervention plan based on students’ areas of weakness is implemented in addition to students’ assisting early morning intervention and afterschool programs Newcomers will receive intervention and progress monitoring to review intervention needs. The instruction will focus on vocabulary development as well as comprehension. and writing skills. The focus is on demonstrating opinions and analysis of text. It is important improve fluency and vocabulary knowledge. Former Ells are provided with the support of testing accomodations for two years after testing as proficient. They continue to receive intervention support as needed twice weekly along with their mandated peers in Math/ELA. In order to help students make academic progress, we utilize the following practices: • Collaborative planning between ENL and ELA teachers • Assisting students during work periods, conferencing with students in and out of class, Informal Assessments, and Running Records. • Additional small group intervention sessions for each grade prior to all state assessments, to focus on literacy and academic language. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers use various strategies and grade level materials to teach ELLs and accelerate their English development. Think-Pair-Share, small group instruction, Stand-Alone services, and individual work with teachers. Continental Press materials include Vocabulary Links (for vocabulary development), Phonics and Word Study materials which are both age and proficiency level appropriate. They materials are geared to vacabulary development and phonics word study for the beginner. New York ELLs by Continental provides support in language acquisition in the four modalities with lessons on storytelling/using dialogue for listening and speaking and informational/literacy texts for reading. The writing component includes essay writing ( descriptive, argument and informational fact based), short responses. Differentiation is used for each subgroup, SIFE, Long Term ELLs (LTE), Newcommers strategies are also used to provide individualized instruction and support the academic levels of the students. A variety of D.I. activities provide for various ways students can indicate learning and skill mastery. The ELLs-SWDs are supported by the ENL teacher and are provided with mandated minutes as beginners (360 minutes), intermediate (360) and advanced (180 minutes). Software technology is used to supplement phonics, reading comprehension, and sequencing. These materials support student understanding of academic language and language acquisition by helping students decode and analyze texts and write about sequence of events in a story.They are supported in content area instruction for during the Stand Alone ENL and in the Integrated ENL classes which give them the least restrictive environment. . 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Students are also assisted during work periods and conference with their teachers in and out of class. We have created skills based AI classes on each grade level to assist ELL- SWD's in achieving their IEP goals. We have schedule these classes to take 2018-19 SCEP-FF 56  place at times that do not compete with their major subject areas. Flexible programming is used to provide for maximum time spent with non disabled peers. Our goal is to place ELL-SWD students in within the least restrictive environment. The criteria for placement is guided by the SOPM and flexible programming mandates for students with disabilities. The Special Education Team compiles information on students for review in order to provide evidence to place students in a seeting that best meets their needs. Student attendance, behavioral needs, academic and socio- emotional needs are all taken into account prior to making a decision. The parents are included in the decision process as well. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The school has various support services for the parents/guardians of ELLs. These include services provided by the Guidance Counselor, Social Worker, Parent Coordinator, School Psychologist, Speech Teacher, SETSS teacher, Nurse, and a Bilingual Paraprofessional.All ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs such as AIS, after-school programs, and extra-curricular activities. After School Support/ Targeted Instruction ( ELA/Math)- offered in English - All ELLs Small Group Instruction - Intervention Class for ELA and Math twice Weekly Offered in English - All ELLs Homework Help - weekly math/ELA/science/humanities support offered in English- All ELL's Saturday Academy- weekly in math and literacy- English - All ELL'S The science program is more hands on and provides for an increased amount of exploration activities which can be extended beyond the classroom. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We are in the process of ordering age and grade appropriate ESL instructional materials and NYSESLAT preparation texts. We will be setting up a computer center and a listening center in major subject classes for ELLs to access both visual and audio support. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? The implications for the school’s LAP and instruction are derived from the strengths and needs noted in the NYSESLAT and other assessments (LAB-R, ScanTron, Teacher Assessments, and informal observations). Adjustments and improvements to our program this year include: • Continue to strongly target language development across the grades and content areas, creating opportunities for active meaningful engagement. • Additional support in listening and speaking for beginner students. • Additional support in reading and writing for intermediate and advanced students. • Small group ESL classes to target language modalities according to their needs 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs and academic and extracurricular services in the building. Homework Help, Test Prep- Saturday Academy, Enrichment Afterschool- soccer, fencing, basketball, SETSS, AIS , and Musical Band. We also have a STEM after school program motivates students that are interested in science careers. ELL's have equal access to our afterschool program, Artsconnection. the program is held M-f and Saturdays. Students are emersed in a varity of art diciplines such as vocal, visual, music, drama, spoken word and media arts. Since the program is funded by DYCD, students also participate in leadership, citizenship and character building activities. ELLs are invited to participate and the parent coordinator/language access coordinator sends letters to parents in their preferred language. Also the ENL teacher encourages students to participate in the various 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Ipads, Laptop Carts, Smartboards, language specific dictionaries, calculators, English and Math software programs, translated textbooks, translated articles ) These materials are used to support the ESL and general education teachers in all content areas 2018-19 SCEP-FF 57  to support all of the ELL subgroups. The native language materials are increasing and the ESL teacher has a variety of materials in the pull out classroom ( Continental, Curriculum Associates and translated articles and materials are used). 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Some classroom teachers can scaffold native language support in Spanish. Parents are supportive in working with the school for the small population of Arabic students ( materials, books and cultural events). Teachers bring in materials which are culturally relevant to students to enhance their knowledge and promote a positive learning environment. it is imperative that teachers get to know students and for building relationships and trust with families. Technology is used to deliver native language support ( (internet, programs and google translate). 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The ELLs are primarily adolescents that come to the school community with a variety of needs. The guidance counselor, and teachers work collaboratively to provide social emotional supports for grades 6 - 8. The Brooklyn North Borough Field Support Center has a wealth of resources for parents and ELLs which are provided by Youth Development. Resources in all areas of student development are provided to the parent coordinator and guidance counselor to aid in supplying the social emotional needs of the students. Related service providers are available to provide guidance in the areas of speech and language and social work in order to aid parents and students. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Ipads, Laptop Carts, Smartboards, language specific dictionaries, calculators, English and Math software programs, translated textbooks, translated articles ) These materials are used to support the ESL and general education teachers in all content areas to support all of the ELL subgroups. The native language materials are increasing and the ESL teacher has a variety of materials in the pull out classroom ( Continental, Curriculum Associates and translated articles and materials are used). 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). The school provides the following resources to facilitate the transition of Newcomers: --An orientation session for incoming new students.- ENL Teacher and Parent coordinator --A buddy system identifying a similar student in his/her class who will assist the Newcomer during the day.- Guidance and Advisory Teacher --Utilization of the American Reading Company Program- Literacy Team. --Encourage students to participate in Academic Intervention programs such as AIS, afterschool programs, peer tutoring programs, and the American Reading Company Program.- Advisory Teacher and Literacy Team 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? In addition, at MS 266, the language electives offered to ELLs are foreign language instruction in Spanish and French classes. They also have the chance to select from the following choices: band, chess, music production, graphic design, community service, debate, study hall and beginning technology. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? 2018-19 SCEP-FF 58  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The ENL teacher has recieved professional development from the Brooklyn North Borough Field Support Center. Content are teachers at MS 266 are provided with a variety of monthly workshops and sessions on topics of need and interest. Focus sessions are held on Classroom Management, Differentiated Instruction UDL, ESL teaching methodologies and strategies, Data Binders, ARIS, the school’s Online Grade book, Collaborative Team Teaching, and using SMART boards PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT AND SUPPORT FOR SCHOOL STAFF - Outside PD support and reading support from MSQI- Monthly- Social Studies, ELA and Science Teachers Understanding the needs of the ELLs - Social/Emotional and Academic Needs of Parents/Students- Guidance Scaffolding strategies for ELL’s- November 2015 - visual/audio support for ELLs Myon Reading Program Implementation- November 2015 Wilson Reading Program- October/November 2016 Special Education Best Practices- Monthly Special Education Teacher Title II Math Program Differentiated Instruction- monthly- Math Teachers 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Staff members are given an orientation by the ENL teacher as to how to best help ELLs to transition in to middle school and high school. For example, to help them transition into middle school, content area teachers are given tips as to how to appropriately provide scaffolds for class assignments and projects, such as breaking up an assignment into manageable parts. Whereas for transitioning into high school students are provided with the skills necessary and are encouraged to take notes quickly and to jot down questions, in either English or their native language to ensure that their questions are answered. Also content area teachers are provided with Continental Press English workbooks to give our ELLs for additional English support in the classroom, which may be used for independent practice, as necessary. Brooklyn North Borough Field Support Center has assigned staff to support the Guidance Counselorwith professional development needs. The professional development requirements for all teachers are met by providing hourly professional learning opportunities. Teachers are also given opporunities to attend professional developments sessions both in and outside of the school building. Records are kept for professional development activities (agendas/attendance sheets Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? At our school, we value and support parental involvement, especially related to the parents of ELL students. During Parent Teacher conferences and Orientation meeting for new ELL’s invitation letters are sent in native languages and agenda of the meeting is also prepared in native languages. Programs for the ELL’s form an item of discussion in the agenda for the meetings. Bilingual teachers translate at the meetings. LAP Team members and bilingual teachers also provide help in understanding the structure of LAB-R testing, NYSESLAT, and NYS Intermediate Level School Testing in ELA, Math, and Science. Translation and Interpretation Services are provided by the Translation and Interpretation Unit. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 59  2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. To encourage continuing community involvement, ELL parents are provided with a venue to participate in the life of our school. At the beginning of the school year, the parents of newly enrolled ELLs are invited to attend a Parent Orientation Session conducted by either the ESL teacher or the parent-coordinator. The purpose of this meeting is to provide information on the ESL program, state standards, assessments, school expectations, and general program requirements. In addition, the ESL teacher meets with the parents/guardians of ELLs during parent/teacher conferences to discuss the students’ progress. Parents/guardians are also notified about upcoming events and assessments. The Student Handbook and other memos are sent to the Office of Translation and Interpretation to be translated into the ELLs’ Home Language. The role of parents in the academic success of their children is of great importance and MS 266 makes every effort to build that key partnership with the parent community. As part of our effort to strengthen the parental involvement, some members of our school community are bilingual and ensure communication between the school and the home. Our parent coordinator is bilingual and facilitates many of the aforemention activities. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 60 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Glenda Esperance, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 61  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Park Place Community School DBN: 13K266 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Glenda Esperance Title Principal Brenda Lee Assistant Principal Shanise Cardona Parent Coordinator Cecilia Ouedraogo ENL/Bilingual Teacher Trysell Mark Parent Adesuwa Ohunwu/ Sp. Ed Teacher/Subject Area Tracy Ellis / General Ed Teac Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Jennifer Denton School Counselor Barbara Freeman Bernadette Fitzgerald Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Cheena Mitchell Other Related Services Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 12/4/15 12/4/15 12/4/15 12/4/15 12/4/15 12/4/15 12/4/15 12/4/15 2018-19 SCEP-FF 62  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 13k266 School Name: Park Place Community Middle School Superintendent: Barbara Freeman The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. To assess our school's written translation and oral interpretation needs, we generate a home language report from ATS to take a tally of the various languages spoken at home by our students. We also distribute an in-house school survey created by the parent coordinator. We then cross reference the information from both data sources and the blue cards that are submitted by our famlies. We use all this information to provide support to our parents. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 63 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language A review of the data generated from our home language report from ATS revealed the following statistics: The major home language spoken by the parents of the MS 266 school community is English. However, we have approximately 10- 15% of our families that identify their home language as Spanish. We also have 1% Arabic and 1% French/Creole 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. To address the various needs of our parents, we have taken several actions to ensure parents stay informed. We created a school website that can be translated in 50 languages. We use an online grade system that can be translated into spanish. We have a robo dialer that can be translated into both Spanish and French. We use a parent outreach software called "Remind." This software allows parents to receive school messages in their preferred langauge and they are given a choice of 10 languages. We also utilize the resources and form letters found on schools.nyc.gov and the 2018-19 SCEP-FF 64  principal's portal. Finally, we reach out to ouside vendors when necessary to translate documents that are only avaialble in English. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? We host meetings throughout the school year. Parent Conferences take place in September, November, march and May. We also host monthly parent meetings. We have several biligual staff members- parent coordinator, social worker and humanities teacher speaks Spanish, our foreign language teacher speaks both French and Spanish, principal - Haitien/French Creole and Music teacher- French / Polish. Our parents and students of arabic decent volunteer to assist us as oral translators. We also reach out to other schools for asistance with obtaining interpreters for languages we cannot address on our own. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 2018-19 SCEP-FF 65  Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Upon entrance to the main office, there are signs posted informing parents of their right to receive information in their home language. The signs posted have been translated in 10 languages. Parents also receive a copy of the Parents Bill of Rights in the welcome package distributed to all families at the beginning of the school year. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The parent coordinator distributes evaluation surveys at the end of each parent meeting. This information is used to evaluate and tailor our practices. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 66 
