 22K277 School Name: P.S. 277 GERRITSEN BEACH Principal: THERESA J. VLANTIS   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information THE GERRITSEN BEACH SCHOOL 332200010277 PRE-K THROUGH FIVE School Number (DBN): 22K277 2529 GERRITSEN AVENUE, BROOKLYN, NEW YORK 11229 (718)743-6689 Phone Number: (718)368-0920 Fax: Theresa J. Vlantis tvlantis@SCHOOLS.NYC.GOV School Contact Person: Theresa J. Vlantis Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 22 JOYCE VERDEROSA Victoria DiPaolo/ Kelly O'brien JEAN PENNACCHIO NA NA NA District Information JULIA BOVE Superintendent: 5619 FLATLANDS AVENUE, BROOKLYN, NEW YORK 11234 Superintendent’s Office Address: jbove@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718)968-6117 Phone Number: (718)968-6252 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Brooklyn South MauriciereDe govia FSC: Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 415 89 TH STREET, BROOKLYN, NEW YORK 11209 MDegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 717-759-4862 Phone Number: (718)759-3909 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Theresa J. Vlantis JOYCE VERDEROSA Kelly O'Brien MARGUERITE BURKE, Ed.D. JEAN PENNACCHIO *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Member/UFT Member/ SLTChairperson   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) ArianaGalucci Member/ Parent NataschaMinze Genevieve Mezzatesta Joseph Thompson Rosemary Kerrigan Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ UFT Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview Our Mission Statement reflects our commitment to all of the students in our school community:   We will provide a nurturing environment that instills confidence and self-esteem in our children as they develop intellectually, socially, emotionally and physically. By creating a love of learning and an exchange of ideas, we will foster life-long moral and ethical values, enable each child to achieve to his fullest potential and celebrate the uniqueness of the individual. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Public School 277 is located in Brooklyn, New York. There are 427 students in attendance from Pre-Kindergarten through Grade Five. The school is a community school with the student population being found within a small radius. English is the spoken language in this working class community. The school consists of twenty classes: three per grade in Kindergarten and Second through Five, two First Grade, two self-contained bridge classes and one full day Pre-Kindergarten class. Our population consists of seventy percent Caucasian, thirteen percent Hispanic, two percent Black and twelve percent Asian. These students primarily reside in Gerritsen Beach with four and one-half percent of the total population residing outside the community. Our academic program is aligned with the CCLS (Common Core Learning Standards) in both ELA and Mathematics. With the adoption of Teachers College Reading and Writing and inter-disciplinary instruction in both large and small groups, our students work on rigorous tasks that require perseverance and strategic problem-solving skills. P.S. 277 is a recipient of the VH1 Save the Music Foundation Grant. This allowed for us to begin a music program within our school. Ultimately bringing an appreciation of music to our third through fifth grade students. New instruments have been purchased to allow for students to participate in band. Our standards-based Physical Education Program is organized by our Physical Education teacher. All grades receive instruction that is appropriate for their age group. In addition, the Physical Education teacher coordinates a variety of health and fitness programs which include: New York Road Runner Club, Field Day, and Move to Improve. Our students are exposed to many cultural experiences through enriching field trips. The children travel to museums, such as the Brooklyn Museum and theaters, such as Kingsborough Community College Theater, where they learn about diverse cultures and customs. Partnerships with Marquis Studio and the Brooklyn Arts Council also help to enrich the program at Public School 277. We view our parents as partners in their children’s education. Parent groups are welcomed into the building for Parent Orientation, Parent Workshops, Parent Visitations and Parent-Teacher Conferences. Teachers frequently call parents, write newsletters or meet with parents to strengthen the home-school relationship. Many of our parents serve on committees in our school such as; the Costume/Scenery Committee, the Fifth Grade Parent Committee and the Yearbook Committee. This partnership between families and devoted professionals is a major contributor to our students’ success. Parents are viewed as partners in their child’s education. We have a strong working relationship with our local public library. Our students take class trips to the library where the children activate and/or use their library card to borrow books. The Librarian teaches library skills and the many resources that are available to the Gerritsen Beach Library. The Neighborhood Library Supervisor visits Public School 277 to kick-off the Summer Reading Program. She also arranges for famous children’s authors to come to our school to talk about their work in regard to writing and illustrating children’s literature. Literary skills, together with a love of reading and writing, are fostered through our partnership with the Gerritsen Beach Library. 0  3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Six percent of our students are English Language Learners who receive instruction from an English as a Second Language teacher. Nineteen percent of our population are students with Special Needs. These students’ needs include: academic support as well as the need for Related Services such as Vision, Speech, Hearing, Occupational Therapy, Physical Therapy, Adaptive Physical Education, Guidance and Counseling. Our Individualized Educational Program Teacher and part-time School Psychologist coordinate the creation and implementation of each student’s Individual Educational Program. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Over the past year our school has made progress in creating professional development cycles that will lead to improved quality of student work. A lead teacher position was created to support this work. Teachers have the ability to observe a lab classroom. Additionally, the lead teacher has the ability to mentor and support teachers based on their individual needs. Our key focus for the 2018-2019 school year is to build teacher capacity around designing and delivering curriculum that engages all learners. This is accomplished through creating clear and measurable learning objectives aligned to the standards and providing the students with multi-layered tasks. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 22K277 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 421 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 5 6 22 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 22 22 8 3 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 52.0% % Attendance Rate 43.0% % Reduced Lunch 6.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.5% 13.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 70.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.09 0% 11% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 68.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 100% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A YES NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A YES NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A YES N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 61 60 22 94.7% 9.3% 20.9% 2.4% 12.1% 1.7% 2 0% 5.9 58.2% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on 2017-2018 Fountas and Pinnell end of year data 82% of students in grade two demonstrated reading on or above grade level. However, a need exists to ensure these students maintain reading on grade level as they enter third grade. 2018 ELA Assessment Data indicated 68.8% of students in grades 3-5 scored a Level 3 and 4, this indicated a decrease of 0.1%. When comparing third grade ELA from 2017 to 2018 there was a decrease of 2.7%. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 85% of third grade students will be performing on or above grade level based on Fountas and Pinnell Reading Levels (Beginning, middle and end of year) through the implementation of HD Word and Teacher’s College Reading Project. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Professional development surrounding the implementation of HD Word by Really Great Reading. On-Site Implementation support visit conducted by Really Great Reading Target 3rd Grade Teachers Administrator Target 3rd Grade Teachers Curriculum and lesson planning centered on group work based on live data (conference notes, checks for understanding). Team unit planning and refinement based on student need and inquiry Target 3rd Grade Students Administer HD Word benchmark assessments to determine student progress utilizing the program. Formal and informal observations throughout the year will provide actionable feedback to teachers based on the school wide focus of enagement. Follow up with all teachers. Target 3rd Grade Students Teachers Unit planning will focus on scaffolding needed for students with IEPs, as well as English Language Learners. Ongoing planning and refinement of units based on individual student outcomes. Teachers Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? June 2018 Administration October 2018 February 2019 November 2018 October 2018 - Common Planning Tuesday Other professional Work times Oct. 2018 Nov. 2018 March 2019 On going Sept. 2018- June 2019 Once a month meetings during Monday Professional Learning Administration Administration Teachers Administration Teachers Administration ENL Teacher IEP Teacher Administration 4  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Grade teams, along with the Parent Coordinator will provide at least three literacy based workshops throughout the year to support the parents' understanding of literacy skills. Workshops will take place from October 2018-June 2019. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources that will support this goal include: ● Professional development days, teacher substitute coverage to allow teachers to attend professional development, schedule changes to support professional development time, parent workshop materials Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, through the implementation of the HD Word and Teachers College Reading Project 75% of students in grade three will be reading on or above grade level as evidenced by Fountas and Pinnell Reading Levels. . Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Fountas and Pinnell (Beginning and middle of the Year Assessments) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? During the 2017-2018 school year the number of OORs incidents increased by four times the amount from the prior year. There was an increase in teacher removals, as well as one principal suspension and one Superintendent suspension during the 2017-2018 school year. When analyzing this data it became evident that select students were involved in these incidents. Therefore a need exists for preventative measures. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 5% decrease in OORs incidents for targeted grade three through grade five students based on the implementation of the social emotional Sanford Harmony Program. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? New Staff will receive Professional Development on the Sanford Harmony Program New Staff Members Oct. 2018 Administration, Guidance Implementation of a school wide word of the month focusing on character. All Students Sept 2018- June 2019 Identify at risk counseling groups based on OORs incident data during the 2018-2019 school year, as well as teacher feedback. Identified Students Sept. 2018- Nov. 2018 At risk counseling groups utilizing Sanford Harmony lessons Identified Students Implementation of Therapeutic Crisis Intervention for Schools by trained staff and increase the number of staff trained. Staff November 2018 December 2018 Counselor Administration Teachers Administration All Support Staff Support Staff Administration Guidance Counselor Peer mentoring between the upper (Grades 3-5) and lower (Grades K-2) grades aligned with the Sanford Harmony Program. Identified Students TCIS Trained Staff Nov. 2018 Administration Guidance Counselor Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Beginning in October 2018, parents will be invited to participate in monthly School Spirit assemblies where students receive the Principal’s List. Additionally, the parent coordinator will provide workshops surrounding preventative measures regarding behaviors. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 7  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources that will support this goal include: ● Professional development days, teacher substitute coverage to allow teachers to attend professional development, schedule changes to support professional development time, Sanford Harmony program, parent workshop materials Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, there will be a 2.5% decrease in OORs incidents for targeted grade three through grade five students based on the implementation of the social emotional Sanford Harmony Program. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Teacher teams collaborate both on grade specific teams, as well as vertical teams. Based on 2017-2018 Measures of Teacher Practice data there is a need for staff to expand their professional knowledge of student engagement in order to increase student achievement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 all teachers will participate in grade specific and/or vertical teacher teams that will focus on engaging students in learning resulting in an increase in overall HEDI score ratings for 50% of the teachers. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administrators will analyze results of informal and formal observations after each round of observations. Teachers Nov. 2018 Administration Grade teacher teams, as well as vertical teams will meet monthly to analyze student work, conference notes and other qualitative data to inform instructional practice. All Students The second Administration Friday of each month All Staff Jan. 2019 March 2019 May 2019 All grade curriculum planning will include modifications for Students with Disabilities and ELLs for mathematics and literacy Once a month during Tuesday Other Professional Work All Students Once a month during Monday Professional Learning Inter-visitations will be scheduled in order for teachers to grow professional and learn from their colleagues Staff October 2018 Model teacher will plan, demonstrate, co-teach and debrief according to data, observations and teacher/student needs. Staff Oct. 2018- June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement ENL Teacher IEP Teacher Administration Administration Model Teacher Administration Model Teacher 0  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Grade teams will provide content based workshops. The parent coordinator will also be responsible for providing families with content based workshops. Workshops will take place from October 2018-June 2019. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Scheduling of common planning time for grade teams, as well as vertical teams, scheduling coverages for inter-visitations, professional development Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018, all teachers will participate in grade specific and/or vertical teacher teams that will focus on engaging students in learning resulting in a 0.5% increase in overall HEDI score ratings for 50% of the teachers. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Informal and formal observation data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2018 Mathematics NYS Assessment data indicated 58.2% students in grades 3-5 scored a Level 3 and 4. This demonstrated a 2.6% overall decrease. 2018 Mathematics NYS Assessment data indicated students with disabilities in grades 3-5 increased 2.8% Item Analysis of the data indicates difficulty with major understanding areas. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 3% increase in student performance on the New York City Mathematics Performance Task (Beginning, middle and end of year) in grades Kindergarten through Grade Two through the implementation of the Go Math Curriculum and problem strategies. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional development will be provided in mathematics problem solving strategies New Teachers Oct. 2018 Administration Curriculum and lesson planning centered on the workshop model incorporating problem solving units focusing on students with disabilities K-2 Teachers Teachers Administration IEP Teacher ENL Teacher Once a month during Monday Professional Learning Utilization of Go Math Guidance Document and incorporation of Engage NY Units of Study while developing unit plans K-2 Teachers Monthly Monday Professional Learning Administration Teachers Inter-visitations will be scheduled in order for teachers to grow professionally and learn from their colleagues Teachers in need of support Nov. 2018 Administration Jan. 2019 March 2019 May 2019 Effectiveness of mathematics instruction will be evaluated through analysis of student outcomes K-2 Students Oct. 2018 Administration Teachers Bi-Monthly during Other Professional Work Formal and informal observations will be conducted, providing teachers with actionable feedback focusing on student engagement K-2 Teachers Ongoing Administration Oct. 2018-June 2018 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 3  Grade teams will provide parent workshops to support parents understanding of foundational mathematics skills, as well as problem solving strategies. The parent coordinator will also provide parents with workshops. Workshops will take place from October 2018-June 2019. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional development session, scheduling of common planning time, scheduling coverages for inter-visitiations Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, there will be a 1.5% increase in student performance on the New York City Mathematics Performance Task (Beginning, middle and end of year) in Kindergarten through Grade Two through the implementation of the Go Math Curriculum and problem strategies. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. NYC Mathematics Performance Tasks (Beginning and Middle of the Year) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The Parent Association plays an active and vital role in supporting the programs within P.S. 277. They collaborate with administration to determine the needs for our students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 there will be an increase in cultural awareness for families through the implementation of three parent workshops. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Classroom teachers will devise a monthly schedule of phone and/or in-person appointments for each student in their class. The purpose of this outreach will be to inform parents of their child's performance. Staff members will participate in parent engagement opportunities by sponsoring workshops focusing on caring and respect for other cultures. Planned parent-student activities with the classroom Parents Association will hold school-wide events focusing on the inclusion of the community 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Classroom Teachers Sept.2018- June 2019 Administration Parents- primary focus depends on the workshop topic All Parents All Students Whole School Community Dec. 2018- June 2019 Parent Coordinator Administration Nov. 2018- June 2019 Nov. 2018- June 2019 Administration All Teachers Parents Association Parent Coordinator Administration If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent Coordinator, active Parents Association, extended teacher time set aside of parent engagement, parent-teacher conferences, schedule for classroom visits by parents Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA X Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 6  X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 there will be an increase in cultural awareness for families through the implementation of two parent workshops. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School-wide calendar of events, Parent Surveys Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Fountas& Pinnell NYSELA Assessment Mathematics Go Math Baseline NYSMathematics Assessment Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) In Grades K-2, students receive intervention through the Fundations Program. Students in Grades 3-5 receive instruction through the Balanced Literacy Approach. Teachers in all grades scaffold to provide academic intervention. Speech and Language Teachers provide At-Risk Speech and Language Services using the Cycles Approach. Students in Grades K-5 participate in small group instruction using the Go Math Mathematics Program. Academic intervention is provided on an as-needed basis through small group work using scaffolded instruction and flexible grouping strategies. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) All Tier II RTI students receive academic intervention in small group instruction from their classroom teachers. All Tier III students receive academic intervention 1:1 with an RTI service provider. RTI services are provided during the school day and our Saturday Program. Tier II students receive intervention service two periods per week. Tier III RTI students receive 1:1 services two periods per week. Academic Intervention is provided during the course of the day, and during the Saturday Program. At-Risk Speech and Language Services are provided on a 1:1 basis with a Speech and Language Teacher. Academic Intervention in Mathematics is provided by classroom teachers in small groups based on data derived from the NYS Math test in Grades 4 and 5. Additional data is derived from chapter and Unit assessments and Units of Study in all grades. Science Gr.1-4 Classroom Assessments and Teacher Observations. Gr.5 Students in Grades 1-5 receive Science instruction from their classroom teachers Academic Intervention is provided through small group Academic Intervention of Science is provided by classroom 8  Data from NYS Science Test Social Studies Gr. 1-4 Classroom Assessments and Teacher Observations At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) OORs Data Teacher Observation instruction, based on data derived from chapter and Unit Assessments. teachers during the course of the school day. Academic Intervention is provided through small group instruction, based on data derived from chapter and Unit Assessments. Academic Intervention for Social Studies is provided by classroom teachers during the course of the school day. At-Risk Counseling may be provided in a small group setting or on a 1:1 basis. At-Risk services are provided throughout the school day. and the Science Content Specialist through Core Curriculum Science. Academic Intervention is provided through the use of multiple access points, scaffolded instruction and small group work. Students in Grades 1-5 receive Academic Intervention through materials provided by Core Curriculum. Academic Intervention is provided through multiple entry points, scaffolded instruction and small group work. The school’s Guidance Counselor, Social and Worker and School Psychologist provided At-Risk Guidance Services on an as-needed basis. 9  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. NA Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 0  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 1  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. n/a 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). n/a Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a 2  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. n/a 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 3  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 4  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S 277 Gerritsen Beach, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Parental Involvement and School Quality Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement School-Parent Compact (SPC) n/a n/a n/a n/a I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 5  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; 6  ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; 7  ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 8  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 9  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The goal of this program would strengthen participants academic English and literacy development through the integration of performing arts and literacy. Students will learn through interactive experiences that promote and enhance language and literacy development. Each session will incorporate language, literacy and art objectives. Units of study will focus on communication, creativity and critical thinking associated with making and responding to the arts. All ELL students will be targeted and invited to participate in this program. ELL students range from kindergarten through fifth grade. The program will take place on Saturdays beginning in January for ten sessions. Each session will be three hours. Students will receive 90 minutes of instruction with the teaching artist and the teacher and then the other 90 minutes will consist of literacy instruction. Both sessions will focus on a theme that warrants extended discussions, as well as academic, creative and reflective writing. Three ESL and/or Common Branch teachers will be needed for this program to provide the students with literacy instruction. Per session will be provided for these teachers. Materials for the arts will be provided through the arts residency. Marquis Studio will provide the residency for our students. We will use author study resources from our library. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The ELL population within our school has grown over the year. As a result classroom teachers need to be provided with professional development that will prepare them with the tools necessary to ensure their students are successful within the classroom. All general education teachers will be provided with professional development sessions focused on advancing the literacy of the ELL learner. Sessions will take place on Monday afternoons during the professional development time beginning in October 2018. On a monthly basis all teachers will meet with the ENL teacher to plan and provide ENL strategies that will support the Units of Study for Teacher's College Reading and Writing. In addition to the ELL teacher providing professional development for the teachers, professional development will be provided through the Executive Leadership Institute. Professional learning will focus on strategies to use within the classroom to ensure ELL students are successful. 0  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: The goal for our parent engagement activities will focus on increasing parent involvement through offering parents the opportunity to engage in interactive sessions with their children. Workshops will be provided through a teaching artist for an hour and a half. Sessions will focus on strengthening literacy through the arts. Workshop sessions will take place on Thursday afternoons. Parents of the ELL students will receive an invitation from the school notifying them of the session. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) N/A  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A N/A 2  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 22 School Name Gerritsen Beach School Borough Brooklyn School Number 277 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Theresa Vlantis Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Jamie Vega Teacher/Subject Area N/A Teacher/Subject Area N/A Related-Service Provider Lori Yurman Superintendent N/A Assistant Principal Sarah Schanstra Coach N/A School Counselor Daniel Caiazzo Parent Kelly O'Brien Parent Coordinator Karen Salinas Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) Psychologist Natalya Cestra C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 429 3 Total number of ELLs 47 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 10.96%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? P.S. 277 uses ongoing early literacy assessment data to target instruction for our ELLs. Currently, we use Fountas and Pinnell as well as running records and classroom observations. The data shows that our beginner kindergarten students need instruction that addresses all four modalities - speaking, listening, reading and writing. Our Advanced Kindergarten students need additional support with reading readiness strategies. The data shows that our first, second and third grade ELLs need additional support in reading and writing. Based on this data, all ELLs receive content based instruction, aligned to grade level curriculum maps. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Common planning periods for the ENL teacher to collaborate with the classroom teachers. The common planning times allow for both the classroom teachers and ENL teacher to collaboratively plan literacy lessons. During this time they are able to tailor lessons to ensure ENL students are provided with the supports necessary to be successful. 4  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of our ELL program is measured by the number of students who reach proficiency levels on NYSESLAT and the period of time that services are required. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Small group targeted instruction focused on the needs of the students. Within the classroom the ENL teacher, as well as the classroom teachers will provide support to ensure the curriculum is accessible for all students. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] All students at P.S. 277, including our ELLs, are evaluated for RTI Tier 2, as appropriate. Individual student data is used to target instruction. Our RTI model cycles every 6 weeks. Students are re-evaluated at that time to see if they need to continue RTI services. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. An analysis of the NYSITELL shows that the majority of the students, who took the NYSITELL were in kindergarten. Two of these students are entering, one emerging, three transitioning and two expanding. These students need scaffolding for comprehension, vocabulary development and hands on instruction to aid comprehension, as well as language acquisition. Analysis of 2018 NYSESLAT scores show: Current Grade 1: one student tested out, five students moved up at least one level and one student remained the same Current Grade 2: four students tested out, two students moved up at least one level, two students remained the same and one student decreased a level. Current Grade 3: four students tested out, two students moved up at least one level and two students stayed the same Current Grade 4: two students tested out, two students remained the same Current Grade 5: one student moved up at least one level and one student remained the same 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Inquiry teams meet within six week cycles throughout the school year, common planning periods scheduled weekly within the daily program, Monday and Tuesday professional development sessions Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. All students receive ENL instruction in small groups, in a collaborative teaching/ stand alone model. They are grouped based on their grade level band, as well as their proficiency level. The program model is based on the results of the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT. Within each group, data is used to target the needs of the individual student. All instruction is aligned to Grade level work, curriculum, and the Common Core Learning Standards. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not Applicable c. DL program. If applicable. 5  Not Applicable 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The principal monitors instruction to ELL students by observing instruction and by inspecting the ENL teacher's program. This ensures that all ELL students are receiving the correct number of mandated minutes according to their proficiency level. As per CR Part 154.2, ELL students are placed into 5 categories and receive the ELL instructional time that is mandated for that category. The categories are as follows: Beginning/Entering - 360 minutes total ENL instructional time (180 minutes standalone ENL instruction; 180 minutes integrated ENL/ELA). Low Intermediate/Emerging - 360 minutes total ENL instructional time (90 minutes standalone ENL instruction; 180 minutes integrated ENL/ELA; 90 minutes standalone ENL or integrated ENL and any other content area). Intermediate/Transitioning- 180 minutes total ENL instructional time (90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA instruction; 90 minutes standalone ENL or integrated ENL and any other content area. Advanced/Expanding - 180 minutes total ENL instructional time that is integrated ENL and ELA or any other content area. Proficient/Commanding- 90 minutes ENL or small group instruction with classroom teacher 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All teachers have received Professional Development on ENL methodology. In order to meet the needs of our ELL students, we focus on Academic Discourse through direct instruction on how to use language symbolically. Academic language is formally taught in English and continuously practiced to describe the features and systems of the English language. Teachers scaffold students' independent reading comprehension through modeling strategies during all components of the Reading and Writing Workshop and in all other content areas. Both our Reading and Math Programs have an ENL component built into the program, in addition to Science and Social Studies. These methods and strategies are incorporated into the lesson plans of the teacher. The children receive small group instruction in all content areas using ENL methodologies. All ELA and math instruction is Common Core aligned. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELLs are properly assessed in their native language. Translated versions of state Math and Science exams are available to students, as appropriate. Bilingual dictionaries and glossaries are available during instruction, to assist students with content understanding. Differentiated instruction is based on test results including LAB-R, NYSESLAT, State Tests, Interim Assessments and DRA2. ESL teachers apply appropriate teaching strategies depending on the level and abilities of each student. Bilingual staff and/or translators are utilized, as appropriate. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status We differentiate instruction for ELL subgroups as follows: a. At this time there are no SIFE students at Public School 277. However, the following plan is in place for possible SIFE students in the future. The interventions would include small group instruction within the classroom and pull-out academic intervention services. In addition, we have alternate text sets available to make grade level content accessible. . b. All newcomers are invited to participate in our Enrichment Programs. Our Enrichment Programs meet the needs of diverse learners as they focus on the Arts, Music, Science, and Physical Education. When appropriate, newcomers will also receive AIS Literacy and/or AIS Math small group instruction during the school day. 6  c. The following interventions are available to developing students: audio text sets will be purchased according to grade level in addition to supplementary materials. Instruction will be provided in small groups by the ESL teacher and the Academic Intervention Services teacher. d. We would provide small group instruction, alternate text sets, and Academic Intervention Services. e. Former ELLs will be included as prescribed by the revised ENL requirements. In addition, they receive test modifications, aligned to NYS regulations. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Our ELL-SWD students receive instruction utilizing a combination of ENL and SWD strategies to access grade appropriate curriculum. By differentiating instruction, the curriculum is scaffolded to provide access to content and language development. Specifically, the ENL strategies we use include the immersion of the English language through technology programs such as Imagine Learning and Books on Tape. In addition, the ENL teacher uses increased wait time, simplification of language and demonstration of concepts through the use of manipulatives. The SWD strategies that are utilized include adaptations of materials and resources to facilitate speaking, listening, reading and writing. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? All ELL-SWD students receive scaffolded grade level, Common Core aligned instruction, based on data. The ENL Teacher meets regularly with the Classroom Teacher and Special Education Teacher to discuss the goals and modifications of the students' IEP's. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The targeted interventions are as follows: RTI - All students including our ELLs, are evaluated for RTI Tier 2, as appropriate. Individual student data is used to target instruction. Our RTI model cycles every 6 weeks. Students are re-evaluated at that time to see if they need to continue RTI services ELLs in our subgroups are provided with small group instruction throughout most of the day. Classroom teachers as well as ENL teachers use the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL data to drive instruction. Our school also uses data from the DRA-2 , Performance Test and conference notes to drive instruction. ELA: Particular focus for ELLs on Tier 2 and Tier 3 is vocabulary development. NYSESLAT and NYSITELL data support the need for additional support in reading and writing for our ELLs. Math: AIS Math focus for ELLs is on academic vocabulary and comprehending word problems. In addition, our focus on academic language extends to all content areas during the school day - Science, Social Studies, the Arts, etc. Bilingual staff and/or translators are utilized when necessary. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project: Writing will be implemented in the 2017-2018 school year in order to promote writing. The ENL teacher will collaborate with the classroom teach in implementing lessons within the classrooms. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? NA 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs receive the same opportunities as all other students at Public School 277. They are invited to participate in all after school programs based on grade level. P.S. 277 offers a recreation program to all students in Grades one through five. . Additionally, we offer a Saturday program to our third, fourth and fifth graders. This program provides extra support with 7  ELA and Math skills. A letter is sent home to all students inviting them to participate in these programs. ELLs are given letters in their native language inviting them to participate. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Glossaries and dictionaries are available in native languages as well as bilingual area content library books. Go Math, offers a Spanish version of all resources. Former ELLs receive test modifications, aligned to NYS regulations. ELLs are provided with Imagine Learning. Within the classroom students are provided with leveled readers on the content area. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native Language support is provided as mandated by CR Part 154. Parents receive communication in their native language. Translation services are available at the school or through the DOE Translation Unit. Report cards are in students' native languages. Native language dictionaries and glossaries are available to the students. Additionally, students are paired with other students who speak the same language, as appropriate, to assist in translation, comprehension, etc. Computers/websites are also used to support the native languages of our students. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Administration and teacher teams ensure that resources are age and grade appropriate. Our Inquiry Team is looking closely at the resources we use to develop age/grade appropriate academic vocabulary activities. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). All newly enrolled students, including ELLs, are invited by our Parent Coordinator to an open house the Spring prior to first attendance. Tours are offered in which the parents and students are able to visit classrooms, talk to administration and teachers There is also an open house for all incoming Kindergarten students on the first day of the school year. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? No language electives are offered to any students at Public School 277. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not applicable. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 8  The training will focus on understanding and using specialized instructional strategies to meet the needs of the ELL population. We will also make arrangements for our staff to attend ENL Professional Development offered by our district, as well as citywide opportunities. Scheduled topics include: Universal Design for Learning; Scaffolding Performance Tasks for ELLs, and Word Play. Our ENL teacher also participates in trainings offered by the Office of English Language Learners. Our ENL teacher will provide professional learning for staff members that targets the needs of the ENL population. This will amount to 15% of required professional development hours for teachers. The ENL teacher will receive additional professional development in language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners . The ENL teacher will turnkey pertinent information with the staff. Teachers will learn to modify their lessons and utilize strategies beneficial to our ELL students. Agendas and attendance documents will be maintained for all professional development. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. All staff are provided with the opportunity to participate in school-based, district and citywide professional development to meet the requirements of CR Part 154.2 training. Professional learning occurs during Mondays and Tuesdays afternoons, as well as conference days. Currently, all pedagogues who work with general education ELL students have received more than the minimum 7.5 hours of ENL professional development. All pedagogues who work with Special Education ELL students have exceeded the minimum 10 hours of ENL professional development. Agendas and sign in sheets of these trainings are kept on file. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The ENL teacher conducts individual meetings with parents to discuss their child's progress and proficiency levels. These meetings take place once in the Fall and once in the Spring. When needed the DOE Translation/ Interpretation Unit is called for translation. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents of all our students, including ELLs, are very active members of the school community. Parents are invited twice monthly to Parent Workshops provided by the Parent Coordinator. Translators and/or DOE Translation Services are available, if needed, at these meetings. Our Parents Association actively fund raises for our school and supports our Recreation Program and the purchase of supplies and materials. Throughout the school year parents actively participate in our culminating Arts activities and a Fifth Grade dramatic performance. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 9  0 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Theresa J. Vlantis, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 1  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P.S. 277 School DBN: 22K277 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Theresa J. Vlantis Title Principal Sarah Schanstra Assistant Principal Karen Salinas Parent Coordinator Jamie Vega ENL/Bilingual Teacher Kelly O'Brien Parent N/A N/A N/A N/A Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Daniel Caiazzo School Counselor N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Lori Yurman Other I.E.P. Teacher Natalya Cestra Other School Psychologist N/A Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: Gerritsen Superintendent: Julia Bove DBN: 22K277 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Karen Salinas Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. When a parent arrives at our school to register their child, they complete a Home Language Survey. Included in this survey, parents are asked in what language they would like to receive written and oral communication from the school. If it is determined that there is a language other than English spoken in the home, our licensed ENL Teacher conducts an oral interview with both the parent and the child. This is done to determine if the NYSITELL will be administered to the student. If a parent requires oral interpretation services in order to participate in the interview, a member of our school Interpretation Team is called to translate for the parent. If we do not have a team member available who speaks their native language, we enlist the aid of the DOE Translation/Interpretation Unit to translate by means of a telephone conference call. Translation/interpretation information is also obtained through the Parent Survey distributed during the ELL Parent Orientation meeting, the information provided by all parents on the Blue Home Emergency Card and through outreach conducted by the Parent Coordinator. We use this data to make a list of all parents requesting/requiring translation and/or oral interpretation. It is then 3  disseminated to the staff. In the event of an emergency we will contact parents using the DOE Translation/Interpretation Unit. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic Chinese Cantonese Mandarin English Russian Spanish Urdu 1 36 0 0 587 12 7 4 .15 5.56 0 0 90.73 1.85 1.08 0.62 1 30 6 2 585 13 6 4 .15 4.64 0.93 0.31 90.42 2.01 0.93 0.62 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. English Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Parent Teacher Conference Notices September, November, March, May Report Cards November, March After School Invites November NYC Code of Discipline September Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Translated versions exist, dates updated Translated Version of the Report Card from STARS provided to parents, along with an English version Translated versions exist, dates updated Translated version provided to families 4  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings Open School September Parent-Teacher Conferences November, March How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Staff members translate Staff members translate 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Staff members call and translate Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. ENL teacher will review the regulation with the staff during the Chancellors Conference Day in November. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Notices are prominently placed in the entrance way and main office of our school notifying parents that translation services are available. The DOE Bill of Parents Rights and Responsibilities pamphlet, in English and translated versions, is available in our main office. When a parent enrolls a child in our school and indicates that a language other than English is spoken by the parent, registration materials, including the Home Language Survey, are given in the parents' native language, when possible. Translators are available at the ELL Parent Orientation meetings, where parents watch the DVD and complete the program selection form in their native language and/or English. Oral translation 5  services are made available to the parents, either by a bilingual staff member or through the DoE translation and interpretation unit. We maintain a current record of the primary written/spoken language for each and every student/parent in our school. This information is collected from parent surveys, HLIS forms, Blue Home Emergency Cards, parent orientation meetings and outreach conducted by our Parent Coordinator. Documents including report cards, student progress reports, conduct, safety and discipline regulations,and entitlement of services notifications, as well as those documents identified by the Translation and Interpretation unit as containing critical information, are obtained and sent home in relevant, covered languages. Members of our Translation Team are available to clarify and answer questions. Translation services are available for parent teacher conferences. Every effort is made to have bilingual translators at all school events. Chancellor's Regulations A-663 are reviewed annually by our LAP team, ensure they are in place. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our school will periodically distribute parent satisfaction surveys, in appropriate languages to gather information on the needs and concerns of the parents of our ENL students. 6 
