 18K279 School Name: P.S. 279 HERMAN SCHREIBER Principal: LORENZO CHAMBERS   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: The Herman Schreiber School 18K279 School Number (DBN): 18K279 BEDS Code: Grades Served: Pre-K-5 School Address: 1070 E. 104 th Street Brooklyn, NY 11236 Phone Number: 718-444-4316 Fax: 718-241-5581 School Contact Person: Lorenzo A. Chambers Email Address: lchambers@schools.nyc.gov Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Lorenzo A. Chambers Elaine Haynesworth Parents’ Association President: Luvena Batista SLT Chairperson: Elaine Haynesworth Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 18 Superintendent: Wilkins Superintendent’s Office Address: 1106 E. 95 th Street, Brooklyn, NY 11236 Superintendent’s Email Address: BWilkins@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 718-566-6008 Fax: 718 - 649 - 7074 Field Support Center (FSC) FSC: Brooklyn South Executive Director: Degovia Executive Director’s Office Address: 415 89 th Street, Brooklyn, NY 11209 Executive Director’s Email Address: Mdegovi@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 7182403677 Fax: NA   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Lorenzo A. Chambers Elaine Haynesworth Luvena Batista Elizabeth Shea Kenneth Briggs Ansia Jalani Maryellen Nocco Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Staff Member/Staff Member/Staff Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Staff   ElizabethRobinson Tiffany Phillip Luvenia Batista Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Staff Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ parent Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our Mission P.S. 279 is a learning and teaching community where students, teachers, instructional leaders and parents work together to provide students with teaching and learning experiences that will transform them into masterful problem solvers and decision makers. Our Vision Students make meaning of the world by connecting what they already know to new learning. The process by which they do this is through an innate sense of curiosity. Children wonder about the world around   them. Wonderment leads to inquiry. By Inquiry, we mean the process of asking questions. Inquiry leads to the process of Discovery is the process by which students find answers. Our work as educators is to lead them to discovery. We do this in a number of ways, including guiding them to discover the answers, versus giving them the answers outright in many cases. As such, educators at PS 279 embrace a vision of Wonder, Inquiry & Discovery! 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Our Values • The shared values that guide our vision are Tolerance, Respect and Integrity (T.R.I.). These values are the cornerstones that help to develop character in our students as we strive to grow students to become masterful problem solvers and decision makers. • Our role as educators is to model these values for our students every day in how we act and speak to each other and with them. Ethnic and Cultural Studies Class - The purpose of this class is to strengthen the ties between the past, the present, and the future. It is the school’s belief that in teaching students about their history, it will have a direct effect on how they view themselves. It is our hope that this course will give them a sense of identity, build self-esteem and self-worth, as well as foster a sense of equality and belonging in our world. As children begin to view themselves in this manner, it is our belief that we will see academic growth and/or progress. Research shows that if students are personally invested and connected to the work, it increases retention, therefore increasing student performance across the board. IReady – online instructional and assessment program for 2-3 Hydroponics Lab LightSail – Individualized online reading program for grades 3, 4 & 5 3 Full Day Pre-K Programs Enrichment After-school Programs/Basketball program Partnerships to enhance the Arts: Elite Learners, Inc., LEAP Student population – 95% African/Caribbean students 445 male/55% female – 5% ELLs 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. At PS 279 the special education student population is broken down as follows: 28% are classified as Learning Disabled, 46% are classified as Speech Language Impaired, 7% Emotionally Disturbed, 11% as Other Health Impairment and 6% as Autistic. 7% of our students receive SETSS services, 7%0 are in an ICT setting, 4% are in a Self Contained setting, and 17% are General Education students with Related Services only. The needs are determined based on IEP's that detail math, reading and writing goals. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The most progress was made in Framework For Great Schools focus area Rigorous Instruction - Area of focus for this year will be Collaborative Teachers - Teachers will grow their practice to facilitate student learning with regards to increasing Math discourse with an emphasis on Math Micro-Labs to discern conceptual versus procedural ideas/processes of correct and incorrect answers. The evidence will be found in student inquiry work on a monthly basis (3 month focus), advance observation reports and increased measures of student progress and performance in Math.   School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 18K279 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 404 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 15 14 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 29 29 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 80.0% % Attendance Rate 75.2% % Reduced Lunch 5.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 1.0% 5.9% 1.7% % Black or African American % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 11.26 0% 16% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 41.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 82% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 12 12 92.1% 4.5% 12.9% 88.6% 2.0% 1.7% 2 3% 7 35.1% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2017-2018 NYS ELA/Math Preliminary Cut Score data, 86% of our students in grades 3-5 made the cut in ELA and 88% made the cut in math. This was the first year in five years that our math cut scores have outpaced our ELA cut scores, making math the area of growth/strength for our school. Our 5thgrade students outpaced all grades with 92% in ELA and 91% in Math making the cut. Needs - Our 4th grade students scored the lowest among the grades in ELA and Math according to the cut scores - 81% in ELA and 84% in Math. Via professional learning opportunities, we will continue to learn about conceptual and procedural misunderstandings and conceptions to access leverage points to increase math and reading learning with an emphasis on 4th and 5th grade. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, Teachers will grow their practice to facilitate student learning with regards to Math by engaging students in Math Micro-Labs in every chapter of our math curriculum. The evidence will be found in assessed student work. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional learning specifically targeting math (PL Mondays) teachers Sept.-Dec.. Principal, AP, math coach Student inquiry work targeting skills areas - Monthly Teachers Oct. - - Dec. Principal, AP, math Coach, Teachers Student based self & peer evaluation - Weekly All students Sept.-May teachers Lesson study and inter-visitations with Math focus all teachers 1-2 times per year teachers Oct.-May instructional leaders and Math Coach 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be informed via SLT, PTA and Parent Coordinator contact and initiated events such as parent workshops and families as learning partner workshops (that are conducted the last Friday of every month). Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher leaders, coaches and instructional leaders will facilitate professional learning. Faculty will engage in inquiry work focused on Math concepts and procedures – PL time on Monday/Tuesday and inquiry time based on schedule adjustments. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Immigrant C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Monthly cycles of student Inquiry meetings, pre, formative and summative assessments, teacher observations - student work. progress monitoring of ongoing assessments with next step follow-up. Periodic Data analysis meetings. 2  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Math in Focus curriculum, post-chapter tests, student work, IReady assessments, performance series/tasks for upper grades. Performance tasks for lower grades. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based on the 2015-2018 NYC DOE suspension data, overall suspensions (Principal's, Class Removals and Superintendent suspensions have decreased three consecutive years from 23 to 19 to 12 this past year. Superintendent suspensions remained at 1 from last year. Class removals decreased from 21 to 14 to 4 this year. Principal suspensions increased from 4 to 7 over last year. Male suspensions continue to outpace female suspensions at a rate of 5 times greater. Strengths – prevention strategies via IST team and appropriate interventions with positive behavior modifications strategies and restorative justice intervention. Needs – increased parent involvement with students who are habitual offenders – to reduce recidivism. A focus on male behaviors. More teachers trained in Restorative Justice practices. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of all students will participate in ongoing learning sessions using the restorative justice practice of prevention and intervention strategies. As a result, OORS incident reports, principal and superintendent suspensions and class removals will not impact more than 5% of the student population and male suspensions will decrease to 4 times the amount of females - down from 5 times as much. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). All Students will be on our Core Values of Tolerance, Respect and Integrity and will receive restorative justice workshops. 3-5 graders will be engaged in ethnic and cultural studies class to promote self-awareness and self-esteem Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students Sept—Oct. Classroom teachers, instructional leadership team 3-5 students Sept.-May. Ethnic & Cultural Studies teacher Parent coordinator/Principal Families will be able to understand our expectations and values partially via our Parents as Learning Partners Parents Sept.-Nov. Our peer mediators and student government representatives will engage all students in our behavioral norms and expectations students Sept.-June Guidance Counselor, Teacher Leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly parent workshops at times most convenient for parents - shared print and video resources with advice and guidelines for actionable items/strategies to occur. Key personnel - Parent Coordinator, PTA President, Title I representative, and Guidance counselor. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources include human resources – guidance counselor, teachers, admin.. instructional resources and schedule adjustments Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 5  Monthly Safety meeting data - Midpoint bench mark - February - OORS report at or below last year's report at the same time. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS reporting system Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The majority of teachers are engaged in structured inquiry based professional collaborations in math and ELA. There are opportunities for staff to experience distributive leadership. Impact- The work of teacher teams has resulted in the strengthening of the instructional capacity of teachers and student progress on assessments. Teacher team collaborations have resulted in teachers having an input in key decisions across the school. Strengths - The dialogue with teachers, administration, and the observation of a teacher team revealed that teacher teams have adopted a protocol for looking at student work. This protocol requires teachers, as a prerequisite to engage in professional collaboration, to identify the students of focus by citing specific data and noticings, provide a description of sample student work and the academic task, and come prepared with ideas towards moving student learning to next level as well as suggestions regarding the resources needed to do so. A big idea is identifying instructional strategies to accelerate learning. During the team meetings teachers share their perquisite work. Teachers offer recommendations for instruction and annotate the adjustments needed in the curricula Need – Deepening of ELA skills and strategies, assessment and Continued gathering of evidence for the purpose of identifying next step actions to measure student progress and performance as it relates to Student inquiry work in ELA with a focus on assessment during instruction and analysis after instruction. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 all classroom all teachers will engage in peer instructional rounds in ELA (in teacher teams, each teacher will be observed teaching an ELA lesson by his/her colleagues) with a focus on assessment during instruction and differentiation. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will engage in weekly teacher-led teacher team inquiry meetings Teachers will meet with instructional leaders including ELA coach to determine next steps and action items including evidence of student progress and performance Teachers Oct.-May teachers Teachers Sept.-May Principal, AP, coach Teachers will engage in professional learning around differentiation Teachers Oct.-May teachers, Instructional leadership 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Invite families to experience teaching practices in the classroom. Keep them informed of best practices via newsletters, workshops and families as literacy partner Fridays. Key personnel - teachers, parent coordinator, Principal, AP Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources include human resources – guidance counselor, teachers, admin.. instructional resources and schedule adjustments Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 8  Monthly mtgs led by instructional leadership team. teacher observations in Advance will reflect majority of teachers rated effective or highly effective in Danielson 1A and 1E . By February, 2019 a minimum of 50% of teachers will have been rated effecticve or highly effective in Danielson 1A and 1E at least one time. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. student work as scored with rubrics - monitoring of pre-assessments, formative and post chapter assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on feedback from the PPR summative feedback report SY 2017-2018 - "..In a majority of classrooms, teachers' voices are most dominant. teachers pose all questions, which create limited opportunities for students to engage in meaningful discourse." The recommendation was to - log on to weteachnyc.org to access text related to classroom discussion. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 – All teachers will engage in professional learning that supports high-level student engagement via questioning techniques and strategies that elicit discourse which will reduce "teacher talk" and increase "student talk" in all content areas based on the Math Micro-Lab model. This will be measured by an increase in teacher evaluations in the area of student engagement; resulting in a 10% increase in Advance Ratings in said area of focus. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  PL opportuites to increase understanding of how to implement and measure micro-labs 4.1: Observe teachers using the Danielson Framework for Teaching (3B & 3C) along with the analysis of learning outcomes to elevate school wide instructional practices and implement strategies that promote professional growth and reflection  Teachers will develop strategies for varied entry points to content based on differentiated student needs 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Sept. May Principal/AP/Coach Teachers Sept.-May Principal/AP/Coach teachers Sept-May Principal/AP/Coach How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly communications - via PTA, SLT, Parent coordinator, teachers Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources as indicated above, PL material resources, schedule adjustments Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-point goal in February 60% of advance ratings in questioning and discussions will be rated effective and/or highly effective. 1  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance system observation data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2016-2017 School Quality Snapshot, 97% of parents say that they are satisfied with the education their child received this year. Need - engaging parents in restorative justice practices to support student social-emotional intelligence. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 85% of parents will receive ongoing monthly communications from teachers and 20% or 64 parents will have participated in restorative justice circle workshops. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Curriculum night participation families Sept.-Oct. Principal, AP, Coach, teachers Two progress reports administered to parents – once between 1 st and 2 nd marking period and 1 between 2 nd and 3 rd marking period families Nov. & May Teachers Monthly Parent workshops on Restorative Justice Circles families Sept.-June Parent coordinator, teachers Monthly contact with parents – phone calls/newsletter – Families as Learning Partners – the last Friday of every month families Sept.-June teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Schedule adjustments – personnel as listed above and instructional supplies Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Monthly updates on parent engagement – who, how many and what was the engagement. Mid-point February - 10% of parents attend restorative justice workshops. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 4  progress reports, newsletter, phone logs Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Tier II Small group 5-8 students Tier III two-to-one Services are provided during the school day. Services are provided during the school day. Services are provided during the school day. Small groups Social skills group once a week for eight weeks. These groups are 30 minutes and they are based on behavior modification. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Fountas & Pinnell Reading Benchmarks, Performance Series Mathematics Performance Series Leveled Literacy Intervention, i-Ready, Focus, Ready Gen phonics i-Ready, Cams & Stams Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Teacher/Parent request based on behavior patterns, Suspensions Anger management group-The program used is Time Out on Anger. 6  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 17 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Needs based assessment by Guidance counselor - school supplies, uniforms, out-of-school/in-school assistance & support - develop plan and timeline for implementation with allotted budget support Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 17 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 7 Needs based assessment by Guidance counselor - school supplies, uniforms, out-of-school/in-school assistance & support - develop plan and timeline for implementation with allotted budget support 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $5,100 8  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. PL opportunities in and out of school (out of school PL includes self-selected opportunities), differentiated feedback and follow-up, Mentoring opportunities. Support includes active participation in Lesson Study and Instructional Rounds. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). SDC team recommends PL opportunities – school-wide participation in June planning based on summative data in preparation for upcoming school year, weekly PL sessions and student inquiry work monitored on regular basis as per units of student culmination Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 9  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). parent involvement activities, early intervention services, open house info sharing – PL sessions for staff at early childhood programs. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Our School Development Committee comprised of teachers, along with teacher teams and grade leaders participate in the process of selecting and creating assessment measures. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 246,000 45,000 0 0 2,425,000 X X X 11-20 11-20 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, 0  State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  1   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 279, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 279 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement 3 Parental Involvement and School Quality  The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; 4  ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 279 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; 5  ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; 6  ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 7  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 18 School Name Herman Schreiber Borough Brooklyn School Number 279 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Mr. L. Chambers Coach Ms. F. Twomey ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ms. A. Mammola/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Ms. T. Carone/AIS Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider Ms. Molloy/SETSS Superintendent Beverly Wilkins Assistant Principal Ms. S. McStine Coach type here School Counselor Ms. J. Matthews Parent Teacher Parent Coordinator Ms. T. Rawleigh Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 455 8 Total number of ELLs 10 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 2.20%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 4 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? P.S. 279 uses Fountas and Pinnel, Fundations, and WRAP, as well as teacher created assessments in order to monitor student progress and inform instruction 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? data analysis and assessments, and staff training and professional development 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? e-class to establish a baseline & Fountas and Pinnel and WRAP reading assessments for progress monitoring 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 9  Once summative data has been gathered, it is analyzed so that instructors may provide the appropriate targeted instruction through either a one on one or, small group approach 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Students fluency and comprehension is assessed through running records, retelling, and comprehension question and answers. are used to move students to new independent reading levels as per our goals. They are also used to monitor progress and find students strengths and weaknesses to be addressed through differentiated instruction. Ell students have fared well using these tools. 80% of our ELL students have increased their reading levels during this school year. 40% of our ELL students have moved up 5 or more reading levels, 20% have moved up three levels, 10% have moved up two levels, and 20% have moved up one level. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Data from NYSESLAT and NYSITELL assessments reveal the students at the Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, and Expanding levels in grades K-5 as well as their strengths and weakness in the modalities of listening, speaking, reading and writing. In addition, scores on the New York State Math, and English Language Arts exams for students in grades three through five are analyzed to determine the number of students achieving a level 4 or 5. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Student performance data is gathered, analyzed and shared at meetings between cooperating teachers Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The ENL program at P.S. 279 is a free-standing program. Since ELL students represent every proficiency level on nearly every grade level, standards-based teaching using mini-lessons and differentiated instruction are best suited for our population of ENL students. The modalities of listening, speaking, reading, and writing are developed through best practices in second language methodology; such as, Total Physical Response, Language Experience, Natural Approach, Cognitive Academic Language Learning, and Scaffolding in order to help ELL's meet the high standards expected of all students. Stand- Alone ENL is provided through a pull-out model where students are removed from their general classroom setting and enter a small group setting for 50 a minute time period. In order to provide instruction that is catered to the particular needs of each student, groups are comprised of students in no more than wo consecutive grade levels, and 2 consecutive language proficiency levels. Integrated ENL Services are provided by the ENL teacher entering into the ELL's general education classroom. At times, the teacher may bring additional ENL students on the same grade level in to teach a lesson with the whole small group, within the general classroom. The ENL teacher works with general education teachers on every grade level to plan and execute lessons that are differentiated to the needs of each student, and connected to the skills, strategies, and information being covered within the broader school curriculum. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not applicable 0  c. DL program. If applicable. Not applicable 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? English language learners are assured their mandated number of instructional minutes by the ENL teacher as per CR Part 154, determined by NYSITELL and NYSESLAT assessment results. ENL Students at the Entering and Emerging proficiency levels receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction per week, where 180 minutes is ENL instruction and 180 minutes are integrated ENL/ELA instruction. ENL students at the Transitioning and Expanding proficiency levels receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction per week with 90 minutes of ENL instruction and 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA instruction. Since the ENL educator is dually certified, the teacher may provide the mandated minutes of integrated instruction, or at other times, the ENL teacher will enter into the general education classrooms during the ELA block in order to provide the integrated instruction. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL program is a free-standing pull-out program using standards based thematic teaching. Explicit ENL instruction is delivered through balanced literacy mini-lessons in the four modalities of listening, speaking, reading and writing, using performance indicators aligned with New York State Common Core Learning Standards and the New York State New Language Progressions. Both ENL and ELA instruction is delivered through the balanced Literacy program model at P.S. 279, phonics, fluency, vocabulary and text comprehension are incorporated into the components of read alouds shared reading, guided reading, independent reading, and writers workshop. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? The ENL teachers knows the needs and backgrounds of each ELL student and maintains dedication to ensuring they are educated and assessed through the proper means in their corresponding home language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status P.S. 279 has a wide array of services for all ELL subgroups. including free-standing pull out ESL, targeted instruction, differentiated instruction, counseling, student assessment analysis, Pupil Personnel Committee, AIS referrals for related services, SETSS and referrals to community agencies. Newcomers are especially welcomed and engaged immediately at P.S. 279. Educators utilize best practices of instruction for ELL's such as following established routines; providing comprehensible input by use of context clues, visuals, realia, manipulatives and gestures; listening centers; computer programs; modeling of standard language structures; encouragement of students to work collaboratively when appropriate, and variations in levels of lessons. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers use the Pearson ReadyGen program for ELA instruction, Math in Focus program for Math instruction, as well as small groups, flexible grouping, scaffolding, front-loading vocabulary, use of graphic organizers, comprehensible input, use of realia, and cooperative work when appropriate to student needs and academic tasks. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 1  Our school provides specific, targeted, differentiated instruction, aligned to Common Core State Learning Standards to ELL students at every proficiency level. Students work in their least restrictive environment to the highest degree possible, engage in collaborative work when appropriate. They are delivered high quality instruction through the use of comprehensible input, scaffolding, teacher modeling and and differentiation in content, process and product. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted intervention programs for Math include Math in Focus, sixty minute math block (K-2), ninety minute math block (3-5), planning guide and curriculum pacing calendar school wide, Targeted interventions for Science include hands on lessons using scientific materials and manipulatives, inquiry based instruction aligned to Common Core Standards, NYS Learning Standards and FOSS (3,4). Targeted interventions for Social Studies include school wide thematic assembly programs, Multi-Cultural Awareness Day Celebration, small group guided discussions and readings, computer Internet sites for research. Targeted interventions for ELA include intensive phonics and phonemic awareness instruction, vocabulary front loading, vocabulary study- cognate words, intensive focus on the 12 reading comprehension skills, balanced literacy approach in order to assure students are provided the daily opportunity to listen, read, write and speak. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Improvements for our program include better use of data concerning ELL's progress. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No programs or services for ELLs will be discontinued 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Ells are afforded equal access to al school programs including Wonderment, Inquiry and Discovery (WID). This program is an enrichment program where students produce questions of their choosing, perform research, and produce a culminating project on the topic. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Our school is rich with materials for Ells. Newcomers use Longman Phonics, Oxford University Press, The Oxford Picture Dictionary for Kids, workbooks and monolingual dictionaries. Content area instruction is aided by Oxford Picture Dictionaries, and National Geographic -Windows on Literacy program. Leveled multi-genre classroom libraries including multi-cultural boooks round out the selection of materials. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Language support is offered through bilingual, multi-cultural library books. Languages include Spanish, and Haitian Creole. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Required services support ELL's Materials are plentiful and correspond to primary school level K-5 age and grade appropriate. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our school is rich with materials for ELL's. Newcomers use Longman Phonics, Oxford University Press, The Oxford Picture Dictionary for Kids- workbooks and monolingual dictionaries and Words Their Way. Content area instruction is aided by Oxford Picture Dictionaries, and the National Geographic -Windows on Literacy program. Leveled multi-genre classroom libraries including multi-cultural books round out the selection of materials. 2  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). There are currently no programs before the beginning of the school year for enrolled ELL students. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Language Electives are not offered at our school. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The professional development plan for all ELL personnel at PS. 279 includes monthly collaborative planning for content area congruencece. Articulation is ongoing through individualized meetings grade conferences, and staff meetings where some topics include; creating and using rubrics, use of data, portfolios, differentiating instruction, conferencing, core curriculum, cooperative learning techniques, modeling, scaffolding and common core alignment. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Support is provided to staff to assist ELL's as they transition from elementary to middle school through inter visitations between our school and the closest middle school, articulation between the schools which our students have applied to by way of the guidance counselor, parent advice meetings and open house invitations. The certified ENL teacher provides turnkey training as per CR Part 154.2. Topics for the training include best strategies for ELL's in the mainstream classroom, cooperative learning techniques, vocabulary instruction, use of graphic organizers, and differentiated instruction, as well as NYSESLAT administration. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Annual parent orientation meetings for families of new ELL's, as well as annual meetings for parents of all ELL's are scheduled and conducted by the certified ENL teacher. In addition to the NYC DOE Office of ELL's Parent Orientation Video, a power point presentation created and facilitated by the ENL teacher illustrates the goals of the ENL program at P.S.279, as well as the content and purpose of the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL assessments for parents. Finally, the ENL teacher meets with parents/guardians to present information about their students language proficiency level, language development progress in 3  each of the modalities (listening, speaking, reading and writing,) and each of the core content areas. In addition, the ENL teacher maintains open communication with all parents of ELL's in order to provide opportunities for parents/guardians to voice their concerns or inquire about their students learning. When necessary, a qualified interpreter/translator who can present the information in the parent/guardians home language is present for such meetings. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our school participates in Parents as Learning Partners where parents/guardians are invited to our school once a month to visit their students in their classroom and share in the learning and teaching by participating in lessons and activities. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 4 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Lorenzo Chambers, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 5  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Herman Schreiber School DBN: 279 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Lorenzo Chambers Title Principal Stacey McStine Assistant Principal Tamika Rawleigh Parent Coordinator Ashley Mammola ENL/Bilingual Teacher Marie Aristide Parent Toniann Carone Teacher/Subject Area Patricia Molloy0 Teacher/Subject Area Francine Twomey Coach Coach Judith Matthews School Counselor Dr. Sourette Fougere Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 6 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: 279 Superintendent: Beverly Wilkins DBN: 18K279 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Ashley Mammola ENL Teacher Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Upon registration families are provided with a language identification form. English language learner teacher assesses forms to ensure that information is provided in the necessary home language to families. Translation support is provided in various sources both oral and written: Home Language Forms, ATS systems, Parent Coordinator interviews and informal oral communication. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 7  Language English, Arabic, Spanish & Haitian Creole Fulani Percent Written Written Preferred Oral Preferred Percent Oral 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Haitian Creole Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to Families plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Parents who ask for information sent home in other languages are accommodated by us; information can also be downloaded from the NYC DOE website. We also provide in-house written translations and have in-house staff members who speak Haitian-Creole and Spanish. Our school's written and oral translation needs indicate there is a need to provide services for parents in the following languages: Haitian Creole and Spanish. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 8  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school Parent Teacher Conferences, Curriculum Night, weekly Tuesday Parent Engagment meetings, special events such as Multi-Cultural Day Parade and the annual Carnival plan to provide interpretation service(s)? 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Designated onsite staff will assist with translation services for families. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) All of the above are available and visible schoolwide, in addition, brochures and posted are displayed throughout the school building and upon arrival families have access to translation services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent Survey, bi-Monthly Parent talks with the principal, informal feedback via PTA and SLT members. 9 
