2018-19 RENEWAL SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (RSCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 32K291 School Name: J.H.S. 291 ROLAND HAYES Principal: JANICE BRUCE 2018-19 RSCEP-R 1  Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles Section 3: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 4: Renewal School Narrative Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Community School Description Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 10: Title I Program Information Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Roland Hayes 333200010291 6 - 8 School Number (DBN): 32K291 231 Palmetto Street, Brooklyn, NY 11221 718-574-0361 718-574-1360 Phone Number: Janice Bruce Fax: Email Address: jbruce2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Community School CBO: Principal: Community School Director: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): WedikoChildren's Services Janice Bruce LakotaLeiJon Catherine Rhee Luis Fonseca Pauline Carbado Luis Fonseca  Not applicable Not applicable District Information Geographical District: 32 Sheila S. Gorski Superintendent: 797 Bushwick Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11221 Superintendent’s Office Address: sgorski@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-574-1100 Phone Number: 718-574-1245 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 3  Brooklyn North FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Bernadette Fitzgerald Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, NY 11201 BFitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-2954 Phone Number: 718-935-4314 Fax: 2018-19 RSCEP-R 4  Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles The Objective The intent of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) is to continue to frame a three-year process for each Renewal school and design a comprehensive plan that outlines a strategic path to a paradigm shift in each school at every level. The motivation driving this work is our commitment to providing every child with a school that meets their academic and social-emotional needs. Closely accompanying this imperative is our belief that every school can be renewed and foster a community based culture of learning. The job of the district is to use our position to provide the systemic vision, strategies, and resources to facilitate school renewal through a collaborative effort including all stakeholders. The core values held as essential for the success of the School Renewal Program:  A “learning stance” must be held by all community members (district leaders, school leaders, school staff, community-based partners, students and families). The work should be approached with humility and integrity. We must all be willing learners.  A “theory of action” must guide the work to ensure clarity and coherence.  Authentic teams that collaborate in the spirit of trust, within and across the various levels of the school community, are prerequisites for successful school renewal  Schools will be places of robust engagement, anchored in positive youth development, ensuring that the school environment is welcoming and empowering for students, families and community members.  Strong professional development/learning is a fundamental part of our work.  The school renewal implementation must be simultaneously dynamic and responsive as well as sustained over the three year period of renewal. The organizing Theory of Action that guides the School Renewal Program strategy: By using the Six Elements of the Framework for Great schools as our improvement structure, we seek to align instructional coaching and leadership development with structural supports in order to build staff capacity. Using schools instructional foci, school leaders and staff will implement changes in curriculum, instruction, school culture and structures so that there are sustainable improvements in student outcomes and school culture. The arc of the School Renewal Program strategy: In order to attain high levels of achievement for all students in Renewal schools we must build capacity to increase student achievement through the adoption of new attitudes and behaviors, research based strategies that improve teacher practice, coupled with the use of clear data driven supports for building students’ skills in the content areas and increasing student engagement. We are particularly prioritizing reading and writing across the curricula. The use of student learning data will drive instruction through strong teacher teams; onsite, job embedded professional learning and problem solving, and accountability at all levels of the system: central, district and school - for results. Renewal schools are provided with intensive training, leadership and pedagogical coaching, and structural supports, monitoring of implementation and ongoing feedback and revisions as needed. Further, each Renewal school will become a Community School and strategically partner with community based organizations (CBO) to integrate social services and expanded learning time into the fabric of the school to help them better serve the needs of students. These schools will stand as centers of opportunities where families can get the supports they need to make sure students come to school ready and able to learn. Structure of the Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) The Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) will serve as the organizing and overarching document for each Renewal school and will be directly aligned and developed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, and Strong Schools, Strong Communities, including the following:  Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks: Demonstrable improvement benchmarks located in the 2018-19 RSCEP, in the Data and Accountability Snapshot page. Receivership benchmarks have been closely aligned with 2018-19 RSCEP-R 5  the Renewal benchmarks so that schools will have one coherent set of improvement benchmarks to meet. All Receivership Benchmarks are a subset of Renewal Benchmarks. While the targets for these overlapping benchmarks are not always identical, the Receivership Benchmark targets are always equal to or lower that the Renewal Benchmarks targets. That means that any school that meets its Renewal Benchmarks targets have by definition also met its Receivership Benchmarks targets. For additional information on Receivership demonstrable improvement benchmarks go here.  Establishing an overarching summative vision aligned with elements of the Framework for Great Schools and documenting key areas of celebration and renewal through analysis of assessments and by envisioning what the desired outcome for each school will be at the end of the School Renewal process.  Setting interim assessment benchmarks that create the path for improvement by focusing on desired outcomes and goals. In this way, the plan will be mapped to the overarching summative vision. In addition to the five discrete goals formed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, each school will create an action plan.  Transformation into a community school in order to increase student and family access to physical and mental health services and other social-emotional supports made available in or near the school.  Expanded learning opportunities for all students, including additional instruction provided during afterschool  and/or summer programming provided in collaboration with community partners. Intensive professional development for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and instruction aligned to the Common Core State Standards (CCSS) and to support staff in effectively responding to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of all students.  Additional, focused strategies to increase parent and family engagement. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Information on the Framework for Great Schools and the DTSDE Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and RSCEP Development 2018-19 RSCEP-R 6  The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure 2018-19 RSCEP-R 7  how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets: 1. Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity 2. Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions 3. Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support 4. Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions 5. Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and 6. Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the RSCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the RSCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for RSCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists in every Renewal school and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the American Institute of Research (AIR) needs assessment, the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 8   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Create a summative vision for the elements of the Framework for Great Schools.  Step 5: Revisit your school’s current goals, and strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you have identified, and will let your school community know when you have reached your goal.  Step 6: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Complete the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and the Community School sections.  Step 9: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether strategies and activities outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust practices along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 9  Section 3: Community Engagement Team and School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Directions: All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). SLT members’ signatures indicates that they have been consulted with and given the opportunity to provide feedback on the plan and the plan’s alignment with the school-based budget to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Expanded Learning Time, Community School initiative, Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the second column. 2. 3. In the first column, indicate using an “X” if the person is an SLT member. In the third column, record the position and constituent group represented such as staff, parent, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), or other contributor. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 4. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the RSCEP, not approval. 5. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Signature (Blue Ink) Check if SLT x x x x x x x x Name Position and Constituent Group Janice Bruce Catherine Rhee Luis Fonseca N/A Luis Fonseca LakotaLeiJon N/A N/A Represented *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Community School Director (staff) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 10  Check if SLT Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) GesaiCourtenay ColeenWest Pauline Carbado Madeline Lopez James Lopez LilianZayas Erica Montes x x x x x x x Staff Staff Staff Parent Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor 2018-19 RSCEP-R 11  Section 4: Renewal School Narrative In a brief narrative, describe the current state of the Renewal school addressing the following: 1. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including your school’s mission statement and a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. 2. What are the school’s beliefs about student learning? 3. 4. Describe your school’s approach to family engagement and progress made with establishing families as Identify any special student populations that the school has and what their specific needs are. partners in furthering student achievement 5. Describe how your school is leveraging community school partnerships to support progress in elements of the Framework for Great Schools and indicate where this has been a challenge. 6. Summarize the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) opportunities that have been offered to your students this year.  Vision: Challenge. Support. Accelerate.  Mantra: Home. School. Community. Juntos Se Puede!  Mission statement: IS 291 is an early high school offering challenging academics and quality extra-curricula programs in a supportive learning environment to create advanced, independent learners.  Core Values - The administration, teachers, staff and community partners of 291 believe that, with hard work, HAWKS are destined for success. We recognize our accountability for guiding our students and are steadfast in our collaboration to achieve the primary goal of graduating competent learners who are well-rounded with expert command of real-world, academic and social-emotional skills; who are successful students in high school, college and career; and who blossom into kind-hearted, productive citizens of the world. 1. Hard-Working 2. Accountable 3. Well-Rounded 4. Kind 5. Steadfast/Safe/Successful  o Priority - Our focus is building teacher capacity to effectively use formative assessment data to make short-term curricula and instructional decisions that ensure increased mastery for all students.  o Desired Accomplishment - Students across all populations will increasingly demonstrate 80% or higher mastery on uniform standard-specific, pre- and post-instruction mini-assessments including Math, ELA, Science and Social Studies Snapshot assessments. Key Features: 1. Small learning community - approximately 280 students. 2. Renewal School "on the RISE" so we get special funding and resources that allow us to customize programming that is student-centered. 3. Community School designation means wrap-around services offered in collaboration with a Community Based Organization, Wediko Children's Services, to target students' social-emotional needs by offering counseling and incentives to students and families. 4. Academic programs offered:  General education  Special education - 25% of our students 2018-19 RSCEP-R 12   Transitional Bilingual education - approximately 30% of our students  Regents accelerated class(es) - 25 - 40 students in 8th grade  Expanded Learning Time is focused on academic intervention with iREADY intervention in ELA and Math. In 2018-2019 1. Latest Quality Review ratings ('17-'18): 1.1 Curriculum - Proficient 1.2 Pedagogy - Proficient 2.2 Assessment - Proficient 1.4 Positive Learning Environment - Well Developed 3.4 High Expectations - Proficient 1.3 Leveraging Resources - Proficient 3.1 Goals and Action Plans - Proficient 4.1 Teacher Support and Supervision - Proficient 4.2 Teacher Teams and Leadership Development - Proficient 5.1 Monitoring and Revising Systems - Proficient  Identify any special student populations that the school has and what their specific needs are. We have a large population of ELLs and SWDs. To accommodate our ELLs, we have a Transitional Bilingual program that is taught by bilingual teachers and is a modified dual language program. Our SWDs can be placed in either an ICT or self-contained class. Special Education teachers are semi-departmentalized to teach Math/Science or ELA/Social Studies as well as SETSS where appropriate. We offer speech and OT as well.  Describe your school’s approach to family engagement and progress made with establishing families as partners in furthering student achievement IS 291 is a Community School so we always have an open door policy as far as families are concerned. To increase the positive impact of high parent involvement, we host about 40 events per year with the support of an active Parent Teacher Association. Families are always welcome in our building as volunteers during our events and our Parent Passport incentive program brings in a lot of participants.  Describe how your school is leveraging community school partnerships to support progress in elements of the Framework for Great Schools and indicate where this has been a challenge. We have an on-going partnership with Wediko Children's Services since 2015. This partnership funded by the Office of Community Schools provides students and families with social-emotional supports like group and individual counseling. There is also the option for more intense support through the partnership with Interborough Hospital for referrals to clinical practitioners. Wediko supports the school with attendance monitoring and facilitating the advisory program.  Summarize the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) opportunities that have been offered to your students this year. Based on the new Renewal model in which teachers have a split schedule, we are now able to completely cover the longer school day mandated for our school. The benefit of this model is that the school day begins and ends at the same time for students so there is no ELT; ELT is built into the school day. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 32K291 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 280 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 35 34 9 4 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 36 35 6 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 97.0% % Attendance Rate 94.6% % Reduced Lunch 28.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.7% 82.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.88 0% 10% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 17.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Yes N/A 35 35 91.4% 1.8% 25.7% 14.6% 1.1% 0.7% 4 33% 5.9 10.0% 8% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups SWD, Black, Hispanic, ED Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 RSCEP-R 14  2018-19 RSCEP-R 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed NA NA NA x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Strengths in Curriculum and Instruction  All curricula are Common Core aligned and support our vision of providing , challenging, high school level, academics for students' high school readiness in conjunction with extra-curricula activities that facilitate practicing college/career readiness skills. Resources used include: 1. ELA - Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project ; 2. Social Studies - Passport to Social Studies and CCLS Regents American History 3. Math - Engage NY Math and CCLS Regents Algebra I 4. Science - NYS Science and Regents Living Environment 5. Foreign Language - Spanish Regents 6. Chancellor's Initiatives that impact the curriculum: College Access for All and Algebra for All 7. Assessments include: iREADY; READY; pre-/post tests; unit exams; MOSLs; and Regents for qualified 8th graders 8. School-wide instructional approach - Student-centered, active learning facilitated by Data Driven Instruction (DDI); Student-to-Student Discourse (S2SD); Multiple Entry Points (MEP); and Literacy Across the Content Areas (LACA) 9. Consistent instructional strategies include: Annotation, Scan-Read Actively-Answer (SRA); RACE(S) 10. Teacher teams - PLCs are established in all content areas; they collaborate on curriculum and assessment development and modification; Google Docs is the platform for collaborative sharing; the schedule is designed with Monday PD time and 2 content team meetings per week. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 16  11. Harvard Data Wise is the guiding process for data gathering, analysis and development of curriculum modifications. 12. Historical Performance Data 2015-2016 2016-2017 2017-2018 2018-2019 (Goal) NA 94% 74% 80% 8% 8% 10% 15% ELA 9% 12% 18% 20% Math Algebra I Living Environment US History LOTE: Spanish NA 56% 75% 85% NA NA NA 65% NA NA NA 80% Focus for 2018-2019 - Tenet 3.5  Justification 1. Historical Data above shows that Math progress has been flat at 8% for two years. ELA performance is steadily improving. we expect that our Regents courses raise the bar of performance in all subject areas. 2. 2017 -2018 Quality Review - 1.1 Curriculum (Area of Focus) "Findings: School leaders and faculty make purposeful decisions to align curricula to the Common Core Learning Standards and include rigorous habits, higher-order skills and the instructional shifts. Impact: Curricula are accessible to all students to build coherence and promote college and career readiness, although not yet resulting in all learners demonstrating their thinking." 2018-19 RSCEP-R 17 3. PPR Summative Feedback - 2.2 Assessment (Area of Improvement) "Paramount to the portfolios is information regarding the learning progressions and improvements based on the collaborative work between teacher and student, thus increasing student independence of the learning." Part 2 – Summative Vision for Rigorous Instruction What is your school’s instructional focus? What is your vision for promoting the instructional focus consistently across classrooms? Instructional Focus: In support of our early high school model, if teachers focus on Data Driven Instruction, Multiple Entry Points, Student-to-Student Discourse, and Literacy Across the Content Areas, then students will master high school level skills and strategies that foster student independence and ownership of their learning as evidenced by improved content mastery. Therefore, teachers use a checklist of expectations we have for planning and delivering student-centered, tasks offering high cognitive engagement. The main components of the expectations are:  Data Driven Instruction (DDI) - study student data before, during and after instruction and use it to inform planning, instruction and assessment decisions. 1. Content teams and individually, teachers use various sources to collect, organize and analyze data that impacts planning for instruction 2. The Harvard Data Wise Inquiry Process provides a clear process and protocols for teachers to collaborate in teams to determine student-centered challenges and work on solving a problem of practice  Multiple Entry Points (MEP) - use data to differentiate tasks and create appropriate scaffolds and extensions contained in the Student Resource Center. 1. Based on student readiness, teachers use data to create learning groups and design appropriate scaffolds to maximize engagement and, thus, academic success 2. Students, over time, can chose from those provided by their teachers, advocate for other scaffolds and/or create scaffolds they need to be successful  Student-to-student Discourse (S2SD) - use high and low-prep strategies for student engagement and make appropriate adjustments to classroom discussion protocols depending on student groupings and content areas 1. Questioning and Discussion component in the Danielson Framework guides the delivery of effective and highly effective teacher practice of facilitating discussions sparked by open-ended questions 2. Students, over time, are comfortable expressing their points-of-view using appropriate academic and content-specific vocabulary until they can initiate and facilitate conversations on their own  Literacy Across the Content Areas (LACA) - use school-wide literacy strategies including but not limited to annotation, SRA and RACES to ensure proficient reading and writing 1. ELA teachers model and explicitly teach high-leverage reading and writing strategies chosen from power ELA standards 2. Students will practice and improve in performance on constructed response questions in all content areas What is your vision for the implementation of CCLS-aligned curricula that meets the needs of your diverse learners, personally, academically, and culturally? 2018-19 RSCEP-R 18  To achieve our vision for graduating high school-ready, accelerated students, we have to ensure that curriculum, instruction and pedagogy are aligned in offering challenging, diverse, engaging tasks. Using our instructional foci as the conduit for CCLS-aligned curricula, we meet our students' needs when:  Instruction is driven by data - We are now a Data Wise Model school, which means that our teachers will be required to learn and use the ACE Habits of mind to improve student achievement. The programming this year has teachers working in content and grade teams during designated times. These teams will adhere to the Data Wise protocols, align their work to address our instructional foci, and produce units and lessons that illustrate the changes that meet the academic needs of our diverse learners. Consistency in using data will be established during observations from administration and during informal visits or inter-visitations.  Tasks are differentiated and include multiple entry points - School-wide evidence of multiple entry points will exist in the programming this year which meets all the academic policy requirements along with enrichment and intervention periods.  Activities are student-centered to promote student-to-student discourse - As administrators and teacher leaders conduct informal observations, types of questions and discussion protocols will be the focus. This information will be reviewed as an instructional cabinet, administrative team and in teacher teams. The desired outcome is to improve in all 3 aspects of discourse which should be evident from an increase in Effective and Highly Effective ratings in Danielson components 1e: Designing Coherent Instruction; 3b: Questioning and Discussion Techniques and 3c: Engaging Students in Learning. Literacy strategies for reading and writing competency are embedded in all content areas - This will be informed by our Data Wise Inquiry process that will focus on reading comprehension skills like annotation, SRA and RACES.  What is your vision for diverse program offerings that allow students to develop skills, habits, and behaviors to be career and college ready? How are instructional shifts embedded in this vision? Consistent with our vision and the early high school model, we ensure that our high school-ready students receive challenging, diverse courses and extra-curricular activities where they can learn, practice and perfect college and career readiness skills. Our program choices aim to create well-rounded students which is one of our core vaules.  Regents Offerings 1. Algebra I, Living Environment, American History and Spanish for students who qualify based on their academic history. 2. Teachers of these courses will be involved in specific PDs offered through Renewal. Students will take B.O.Y and E.O.Y performance tasks to monitor their progress. 3. Parents will be notified of the expectations for the course and the impact of success on high school readiness; additionally, parents kept abreast of student progress on a quarterly basis.  Annual Thurgood Marshall Junior Mock Trial Program 1. A select group of 8th grade students only work with a lawyer to prepare for the challenge of presenting a case in a courthouse against other schools. The proceedings are presided over by an actual judge. 2. Parents will be notified of the expectations for the program before the class begins. The teacher adviser will host a parent event to gain parental support.  College Access for All 1. 7th grade teachers co-facilitate 10-week series of workshops delivered by a CA4A organization. The program culminates in a college tour to Howard University. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 19 2. Students in the CA4A facilitate the college information session of the annual career fair sharing information they learned about the college application process and the unique characteristics of colleges and universities they study. 3. At the end of the program, parents are treated to an award ceremony in which 5 students are gifted a laptop computer.  Algebra for All - Accelerated math in all classes 1. Each year, about 25 -40 students progress will be monitored for participation in the accelerated program based on their ELA, Math and Science performance in 6th and 7th grades. 2. Qualifying 8th grade students will be programmed to take the Algebra I Common Core, Living Environment Regents, Spanish LOTE Regents and American History Common Core. Students take 10 periods of Math and ELA, and 7 periods of Science, Social Studies and Spanish.  SHSAT Day School 1. Serves 7th grade students with focused preparation for the Specialized High Schools Aptitude Test. Once prepared, students will sit the SHSAT exam in the Fall of their senior year. The opportunity to attend a Specialized High School becomes more real for those we excel in this program. 2. Teachers receive professional development to coach students through the content and specific strategies for success on this high-stakes exam.  Student Council 1. Students nominate one of their peers for this leadership role in the school. A total of 15 SC representatives meet with the principal and CBO director to voice their opinions and to advocate for their peers. They are given opportunities to address the student body during town hall meetings and to participate in community events as ushers for community service credit.  National Junior Honor Society 1. Whole-school opportunity to encourage and recognize academic scholarship and encourage community service. Students earn their way into the NJHS based on their average in all 4 core courses. Eligibility is determined by honor roll status as follows: Principal's Honor Roll is 95 - 100 average; Gold Honor Roll is 90 - 94 average; Silver Honor Roll is 80 - 89 average. 2. Parents have the opportunity to celebrate with students during the NJHS induction ceremony in March. What do you envision the delivery of instruction to look like so that all students are set up for success? We will have consistency in delivery of instruction when:  Teachers structure lessons according to the habits of mind of that content area. 1. ELA - TC Reading/Writing Workshop 2. Science - 5E lesson 3. Social Studies - two sides of an argument 4. Math - Problem of the Day  Lesson plans follow the recommended school-wide components with evidence of alignment with our instructional foci  The classroom environment contains relevant anchor charts and a Student Resource Center with unit/lesson-specific scaffolds to which students have been directed by the teacher. These items are in the form of handouts 2018-19 RSCEP-R 20 and flash cards with a condensed version of a concept that is relevant to the content being covered. The tools will be pre-determined by the teacher using formative data about their class. The impact should be increased student independence to actively engage in the learning tasks.  All lessons include formative and summative assessments that collect the appropriate data for the objective(s)   of that lesson Students receive actionable feedback verbally and/or in the form of a rubric; students can also have opportunities to peer and self-assess verbally and/or in the form of a rubric. This year, we will ensure that rubric feedback contains a GLOW, GROW and a strategy that students can use to improve. iREADY periods will be governed by a standard protocol for reading/math intervention determined collaboratively by our READY coach. Teacher are . Students are . . . Aware of their assessment results Using data to set goals Tracking their progress . . Identifying the data used to plan lessons Using Data data to organize students into groups Driven Instruction Using data to set goals for and with 2018-19 RSCEP-R 21  students Collecting data during lessons Differentiating instruction by task, grouping, resources, pace, outcome, support or assessment to meet the needs of all students Using data to plan appropriate scaffolds and Being challenged at their own level Producing work that represents grade-level standards mastery Accessing the Student Resource Center freely Multiple Entry Points 2018-19 RSCEP-R 22  Student-to-Student Discourse extensions for appropriate students Placing lesson-specific scaffolds and extensions in the Student Resource Center Planning discussions into their lessons Using guiding questions to spark convComfortable posing questions to the teacher and each other Are equipped with the 2018-19 RSCEP-R 23  ersation vocabulary from the word wall, for example, to drive conversation Allowing students to ask questions of them and each other Providing access to content-specific and academic vocabulary used in conversation Planning reading and writing into their lessons Using readReading and writing in all their classes Applying the literacy Literacy Across the Content Areas 2018-19 RSCEP-R 24  strategies (annotation, SRA, RACES) learned in all classes ing and writing as a tool for engagement and formative assessment of comprehension How do you envision teachers using multiple entry points to ensure the success of every child?  A select group of teachers will engage in inquiry around multiple entry points. to reduce the time it usually required for one cycle, the Instructional Leadership Team will create a modified version of the Data Wise Inquiry Process. The MEP inquiry team will hinge their work on steps 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7 of the swoosh. The goal is to observe and collect data about the elements of our MEP look fors; and as teacher effectiveness is evident from student mastery, the team will reflect on their own practice to determine areas of growth. In the end, team members will become model teachers whose work can be used as an exemplar teacher inter-visitations. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 25  Multiple Entry Points Teachers are: Students are:  Differentiating in Being challenged at 2018-19 RSCEP-R 26  struction by task, grouping, resources, pace, outcome, suppotheir own level  Producing work that represents grade-level st2018-19 RSCEP-R 27  rt or assessment to meet the needs of all students  Using data to pandards mastery  Accessing the Student Resource Center freely 2018-19 RSCEP-R 28  lan appropriate scaffolds and extensions for students  Placin After self-assessing, creating their own scaffolds Feeling e 2018-19 RSCEP-R 29  mpowered to share their scaffolds with their peers g lesson-specific scaffolds and extensions in the Student Res2018-19 RSCEP-R 30  ource Center  Culturally Responsive lessons that are consiste2018-19 RSCEP-R 31  nt with the characteristics of our students What is your vision for the use of a comprehensive assessment strategy (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, and summative) to drive curricular, instructional, and organizational decisions that impact student outcomes? Consistent with building student independence and ownership of their learning, the assessment strategy ensures that myriad data sources are available for teachers; simultaneously, the assessment results are consistently shared with students to keep them abreast of their progress and to provide a context for goal-setting throughout the year.  Student-Led Conferences 1. Conducted quarterly in preparation for Parent Teacher Conferences. 2. Process intended to empower students; requires goal-setting, progress monitoring, conferencing with teachers or peers, and goal revisions. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 32 3. The student portfolio is the "resume" of a student's academic journey towards mastery; it's used as a tool for data conversations. 4. Students are trained to share their data story with teachers and their parents .  Strategic Data Chats 1. Administered 3 times this year in November, February and June. 2. Data meetings where teachers and administrators analyze share current data, determine/explain patterns and trends, and ultimately, brainstorm implications for instructional decisions that impact student progress. Teacher goals are adjusted. Strategic interventions are determined. 3. Teachers' student achievement benchmarks set at the start of the year are reviewed; strengths and challenges are clarified; goal is revised.  iREADY 1. Administered 3 times per year in October, January, and May. 2. Students take the computer-based assessment which is automatically graded and the results are immediately available for teacher use. Students review and adjust their personal goals.  READY Pen and Paper 1. Administered 2 times per year in December and March.  NYC Performance Tasks 1. Beginning of Year and End of Year assessments administered in Regents Living Environment, Algebra I, Spanish and American History.  Pre- and Post- Assessments 1. Teacher-created assessment administered in all content areas before and after a unit of study. 2. Math Snapshot and ELA Targeted assessments focus on power standards. This data is collected in a Google Doc that provides metrics on patterns of mastery that impact individual, class and grade level interventions.  Imagine Learning 1. Spanish language assessment administered in ENL courses only. Please indicate below the specific assessments that you are implementing and their purpose for each grade. Assessment Name Assessment Type Grades Implemented Purpose (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, summative) Imagine Learning Diagnostic (1) ELLs in all grades iREADY Benchmark (2) Diagnostic (1) Benchmark (2) All grades Alternative to iREADY exam that meets the modified language needs of English Language Learners  Quick turnaround time of results  Plethora of reports available for administration, teachers, students and families 2018-19 RSCEP-R 33   Reports detail standards specific needs analysis and interventions READY Pen and Paper Benchmark (2) All grades  Assesses the standards and replicates the rigor of the NYS ELA and Math tests New York City Performance Task Diagnostic (1) Summative (1) Students in the 8th grade accelerated program  Actual Regents exams used to monitor progress and predict readiness Formative All grades  Teacher-created to assess all standards  Consists of differentiated tasks Pre- and Post-Assessment Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. In 2018-2019, the math goal is to maintain 100% of our current level 3 and 4 students, achieve 15% overall proficiency on the NY State test and an 85% Algebra I Regents passing rate. Success will be evident when at least 80% of students achieve 80% or better mastery on snapshot assessments developed with past Algebra I Regents questions and CCLS-aligned released questions and from the increase in students who are on or above level in iREADY math after 3 administrations of the assessment. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal: Which Renewal benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal? Average Math Proficiency 2018-19 RSCEP-R 34  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Average Math proficiency October 2018 Administration Predicted end-of-year proficiency increases 2 points by January and 5 points by March Increased student performance towards 80% or more of students achieving 85% or more mastery on Algebra I, Living Environment, US History and Spanish Regents assessments Increased student performance towards 80% or more of students achieving 85% or more mastery All Students iREADY Math intervention - After identifying slippable and pushable groups teachers will tailor AIS with specific lessons January 2019 March 2019 Regents Teachers Average Math proficiency October through June Principal APs ELA and Math Coaches All students Average Math proficiency September 2018 through June 2019  Principal  APs  Teachers Past Regents exams used to create formative assessments, interventions and extensions - Teachers of Regents courses will collaboratively create 10 assessments that will be tracked for student mastery and used to determine student readiness. Snapshot Assessments for standards mastery - Teachers will use 2 administrations of each assessment to determine improvement made from pre- to post-test mastery 2018-19 RSCEP-R 35 Students Average Math proficiency Teachers September 2018 through June 2019 4 Times per year Administration Math Coach Teachers Avg. math proficiency Rigorous Instruction Collaborative Teachers Increased student performance towards 80% or more of students achieving 85% or more mastery Increased student performance towards 80% or more of students achieving 85% or more mastery HAWKS Actionable feedback - Using our school-wide feedback form, teachers will continue to provide glows and grows/corrective strategy to students Strategic Data Chats - The protocol for these professional conversations between teachers and administrators will remain the same as last year. Teachers will track student progress and prior to each SDC, they will complete a data analysis and reflection on their progress towards meeting the benchmarks set at that start of the school year. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Student-led conferences will be established as a structure for students to share their progress with families. 1. The AP of Family Engagement/Empowerment will lead the initiatives that focus on Rigorous Instruction. 2. Timeline: September Family Curriculum Night families will be provided with a curriculum overview that outlines the topic; big idea(s) and guiding questions. November, March and May Families have 3 additional opportunities to meet with teachers. During Parent Teacher conferences, parents/guardians can observe their children share their progress and goals using their portfolio assignments and the Student-Led Conference Guide. The AP of Family Engagement/Empowerment will collaborate with teacher representatives from the Parent-Teacher Association, PTA Board members, Parent Coordinator, AP of Family Engagement Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, etc. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 36   Office of Teacher Leadership Funds $27,500/yr- Teacher leaders including 1 Master Teacher, Model Teachers TBD will be funded this year. The Master Teacher will be member of the Instructional Leadership Team.  Professional Learning will cost nothing if it is concentrated during the Monday PD time. Teacher leaders will be approved for 25 - 30 hours of per session per month for collaboration and curriculum work. A Data Specialist will be assigned to this task.  Based on the strong relationship formed with our CBO, Wediko, we will continue to share the expenditures on incentives for students that meet our goals. $5,000 is budgeted by the CBO.  Since we will be relying on technology, a technology intern will be hired from City Tech to maintain the hardware in the building. Our current technology resources including SMART Boards, iPads, laptops, and printers will now be serviced on an on-going basis to ensure that they are in working order for uninterrupted usage. Software subscriptions will be purchased for iReady and Ready Pen and Paper; and Imagine Learning.  To support instructional goals, materials such as textbooks, classroom library books, and writing tools to supplement Student Resource Centers in every classroom will be purchased. The largest expenditure will be on Teacher's College reading libraries that align with the ELA curriculum. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) X Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. As a predictor of growth, in November, January, March and June, the school will use 80% mastery in Snapshot assessments to gauge progress and increases in the number of students who are on or above level on the iREADY assessment. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Math Snapshot assessments and iREADY Math periodic assessment Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 37  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. NA x x NA Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 5. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Strength(s) in Supportive Environment Justification Data 2018-2019  Quality Review results: Positive Learning Environment - Well Developed  Met Renewal benchmark for attendance - 91.87%  2% reduction in chronic absence   Core Values: Hard-working; Accountable; Well-rounded; Kind; Steadfast/Safe/Successful  Wediko Children's Services is fully integrated into the school community. The CBO Director is a member of the Increase in the number of students with 100% attendance ILT, Socail-Emotional Team and Attendance Team.  Established Social-Emotional Team that meets weekly to address students' academic and emotional needs. Focus 2018-2019 - Tenet 5.4 All stakeholders will be included in the implementation of PBIS this year with the formation of an advisory team consisting of administration, staff, parents and CBO staff. To ensure community ownership of the processes involved in maintaining a safe and supportive learning environment for our students, teachers, families and students will be 2018-19 RSCEP-R 38  apprised of the SE goal; the structures in place to implement this work; and the outcomes we expect as a healthy HAWKS learning community where the core values are upheld and demonstrated by everyone. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Supportive Environment What is your vision for a supportive school environment? How will you in partnership with each CBO and families enact your vision? With our core values and our socio-emotional program, our vision is to graduate students who own their emotions and their responses to them so that they can be successful in their relationships with others at home, as they transition into high school and throughout life. In essence, students know that emotional ownership is just as important as owning your school work. We hope to impact students and families positively with by our own emotional constancy. Who are your CBO partners? How will each CBO sustain and support the social-emotional and academic growth of your students? CBO Partner Wediko Children's Services CBO Focus This organization specializes in counseling of children with multiple types of social-emotional trauma. Their scope of work also includes milieu support in common areas like the hallways and cafeteria; pushing-in to classes during advisory to support the implementation of our curriculum; facilitating the Attendance Team; and infusing Community School Initiatives. Interborogh Hospital A school-based provider will be available to students and families throughout the year for evaluations and referrals. Coalition for Hispanic Families BEACON provider housed in our building and partnering on community events like Thanksgiving Luncheon and adult learning courses for parents /guardians. How will you in partnership with your CBO will create a supportive environment and engagement for your students’ families? In creating a supportive environment for students, we commit to the following:  Wediko CBO staff will: 1. Monitor and analyze attendance daily, weekly and monthly using the Attendance Heat Map and ATS 2. Determine a focused group of students students in need of intervention services for chronic absence or severe chronic absence 3. Divide the focus group among counselors who will be responsible for learning/knowing what the students are experiencing that's affecting their attendance and determine next steps for support 4. Facilitate the attendance awards during monthly town hall meetings in which students are recognized as an example to their peers 5. Continue to collaborate with the school by participating all parent-centered events  The Social-Emotional Team will: 1. Including the Principal, Guidance Counselor, Social Worker, Community School Director, IEP Coordinator and Interborough Clinician 2018-19 RSCEP-R 39  2. Build capacity of our members to successfully problem-solve family issues using the protocols and procedures adopted by the team for identifying, processing and directing students' families to the most appropriate resources for their needs.  The Coalition for Hispanic Families will: 1. Offer the BEACON program during extended hours after-school for all our students. We will continue to partner with them to bring a food pantry to the school; 2. Offer the food pantry at least two times per year at one of our school events 3. Co-sponsor events or give-aways that increase parent involvement Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Supportive Environment. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks.  Under the direction and supervision of the Social-Emotional Team, we will increase our attendance impact by including more constituents in the implementation and assessment of our rewards/incentives and interventions such that, by June 2019, as evidenced by ATS and Heat Map reports, students will have: 1. 92% attendance 2. 5% reduction in chronic absence Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal? Student Attendance 2018-19 RSCEP-R 40  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. ATS and Attendance Heat Map data will be monitored daily, weekly and monthly Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) All Student Attendance September -Social-Emotional Team:  Decrease Students June  Administrators  Community School Director  Guidance Counselor   Social Worker IEP Teacher  in the number of absent and late students Increase in the % of students with at least 90% attendance Social Worker  Decrease  in the number of absent and late STHs Increase in the % of STH students with at least 90% attendance  Decrease  in the number of absent and late students Increase in the % of students with at least 90% attendance STH students Student Attendance September -June STH students will have the Social Worker working closely with their families to support them with challenges of STH situations  Attendance team  Parent Association All students Timely communication with parents about their child's attendance using Kinvolved and Heat Map reports Student Attendance At each Meet the Teacher Night and Parent-Teacher Conference event, Attendance Profile reports will be shared with parents. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 41  CBO staff will continue to support the Attendance Team All Students Students with IEPs School Implementation Team will continue to address the specific needs of our Student with Disabilities Student Attendance September -Wediko staff  Decrease June  in the number of absent and late students Increase in the % of students with at least 90% attendance Student Attendance October -Staff selected for the team  Decrease June  in the number of absent and late SwDs Increase in the % of SwDs with at least 90% attendance 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. One of our initiatives being carried over from 2017-2018 is the Parent Passport which is an incentive for parents to participate in community events. This program is a parent version of our incentive for students. The rationale is that as parents feel the accountability of attendance, the same agency is transferred to students. 1. Timeline: September to June approximately 40 events per year 2. Key Personnel: Parent Coordinator, Community School Director, Guidance Counselor, Social Worker and representative(s) of the Parent-Teacher Association Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Time is spent on: o Weekly Attendance Team meetings o Monthly town hall meetings o Advisory o Home visits o Parent Association and School Leadership Team 2018-19 RSCEP-R 42 o Student Council o Training key staff on Attendance Heat Map o Expansion of PBIS to include Restorative Practices (New!)  Financial resources through Title I and Title III are allocated to: o Events like annual State of the School Event, annual Community School Forum, annual Health Fair, monthly Saturday Parent Breakfast, monthly attendance rewards for students, end-of-year Perfect Attendance Dinner o Kinvolved license o Office of Community Schools - CBO Wediko Children's Services - CBO Director, Case Managers, Clinicians and Interborogh School Mental Health Services  Human resources involved in the execution of this vision: o Parent Coordinator o Guidance Counselor o Social Worker o School Based Support Team - School Psychologist o Student Intervention Team - AP, CBO Director, Guidance Counselor, IEP Coordinator, ELL Coordinator o Attendance Team - Principal, AP, CBO Director, Attendance Counselors, o Counseling Team - Guidance Counselor, Social Worker, CBO Director o Success Mentors - Administrators, teachers, paraprofessionals, custodians and School Safety Agents Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. ATS and data captured by the Attendance Heat Map will be used throughout the school year. A midpoint check will be in February 2019, at which point, we expect that our average attendance rate is 93% and the Attendance Heat Map shows a 2.5% decrease in the number of active student who are chronically absent. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ATS reports and the New Visions Attendance Heat Map Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 43  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed NA NA NA x 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Strength(s) in Collaborative Teachers Justification Data 2017-2018 1. Met Renewal benchmark of 3.12 - 3.82 with 3.19 2. Quality Review result - Teacher Teams and Leadership Development - Proficient 3. Harvard Data Wise Model School since 2016-2017. The DWI structure guides the inquiry process by which teachers collaborate to solve a problem of practice. 4. Scheduling allows teachers to collaborate in content, grade and co-planning teams Focus 2018-2019 - Tenet 4.5 Consistent with our early high school model, in order to prepare students for the challenges of high school and beyond, we will use assessment data more strategically. Teachers will collect, analyze and provide feedback; while students will need to be more reflective, engage in self-assessment to identify strengths and challenges; and determine possible next steps. All of these student actions, as we build student capacity in handling themselves like high school and college students, should be done without the teacher's assistance. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 44  Part 2 – Summative Vision for Collaborative Teachers What is your vision for collaborative teaching?    Individually, by the work that we do in professional development and with Data Wise Inquiry, In content teams In grade teams How do you envision collaboration amongst your School Instructional Cabinet to improve teacher practices and student learning? The teacher leaders on the Instructional Leadership Team will be competent teaching professionals who are experts in their subject area. They will be thought partners for the administration when analyzing data and determining strategies and next steps. They will exemplify the core values of the school in all their interactions with each other and with their colleagues. When they facilitate the data mining sessions that will occur very often as a Data Wise Model school, they will convey the urgency and impact that this work has on the future of the school and its students. How do you envision collaboration within teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? Teacher team members will be sharing the responsibility of creating, facilitating and following up on details like the Meeting Wise rolling agenda. Other aspects of pedagogy should improve from the discussions that occur before, during and after an inter-visitation. The entire structure has trust-building at its core. The sharing they do will be mutually beneficial as they model for each other, make suggests of how to adjust lessons, and embrace the problem of practice inquiry wholeheartedly. As for student learning, the cycles of observation will confirm the impact of teacher team work. How do you envision collaboration across teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? Similarly to the impact within teacher teams, the impact across teacher teams should manifest in Advance ratings. When grade teams meet, their will now be time to reflect on the interdisciplinary instruction that adds to the complexity and rigor of the curriculum. As ideas are exchanged between individuals with different strengths, we expect more communication about students performance in different courses and how to address learning gaps as a team. Grade level data mining should produce better alignment of interventions and extensions for students identified. The big idea is that across teams, teachers now take a multi-faceted approach to addressing the needs of students. What data will teachers and the School Instructional Cabinet regularly review to ensure that they are reflecting upon their teaching practices and meeting individual student learning needs? What is the intent for reviewing each piece of data? (ex. Teachers will regularly review student IEPs when developing lessons in order to ensure that tasks are appropriately scaffolded.) Data Reviewed Intent Ready pen and paper & iReady Provide a baseline for student performance in ELA and math. Use the computer adaptive program as individualized intervention. Gains/loss analysis between the benchmark and the end-of-year results. MOSL in Science and Social Studies Part 3 – Annual Goal 2018-19 RSCEP-R 45  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. In 2018-2019 the ELA team will collaborate on lesson planning to improve consistency in reading and writing structures and strategies used in the content area. Consistency should increase standards mastery as assessed by ELA standards-based tests and TC writing tasks. By June 2019, the results should include: 1. 100% of current level 3 and 4 students will maintain their proficiency 2. 20% overall proficiency on te 2019 NYS ELA test Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Collaborative Teaching Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve ELA Average Proficiency 2018-19 RSCEP-R 46  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. ELA team will meet weekly to plan lessons aligned to the TC Reading and Writing workshop Teachers will administer the iREADY diagnnostic assessment 3 times per year Teacher teams will use READY pen and paper assessments as a baseline and benchmark. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) ELA Teachers ELA Average Proficiency Septermber 2018 - June 2019 Principal ELA Teachers October 2018 Renewal ELA Coach Principal ELA Average Proficiency January 2019 Renewal ELA Coach March 2019 All students Collaborative Teachers October Master Teacher February Assistant Principals How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Observations with an overall Effective or Highly Effective rating Improvements in scale score and performance level Increase in the percentage mastery from the baseline to benchmark. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Each content team will set goals using the Framework for Great Schools which includes a goal for Strong Family-Community Ties so that they are cognizant of the importance of their role in connecting with families. Similar to the monitoring of whole-school goals, teacher teams will be monitoring their efforts and success at maintaining strong family ties. 1. Timeline: Year-long Key Personnel: Teacher teams; AP content supervisor; PTA Board members Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 RSCEP-R 47  Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  READY pen and paper assessment and iREADY will be purchased to be used school-wide. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By the second administration of the iREADY assessment in January 2019, there is a prediction of at least 10% overall proficiency. By the second administration of the READY assessment in February 2019, there will be a 25% increase in overall mastery. By the end of January 2019 cycle of observations, there will be 50% of ELA teachers being rated Effective or Highly Effective in Danielson 3b, c, d. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress will be gauged by administering READY pen and paper baseline/benchmarks; iREADY assessment; and Advance. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 48  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, SOP(s) Addressed Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the RSCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). NA NA X NA Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Strength(s) in Effective School Leadership Justification Data 2017-2018  Our most recent Framework for Great Schools report indicates that Teacher-Principal trust is at 93%; In the category of Effective School Leadership, 95% of teachers agreed that there was "program coherence"; 96% agreed that there was effective "instructional leadership."  Teacher Leaders include 3 Model Teachers and 1 Master Teacher shared with another school  Content team leaders facilitate weekly meetings with their colleagues and provide documentation through Google Docs. Focus 2018-2019 - Tenet 2.4 To prepare our students for the challenges of early high school academics, teaching practice must reflect the quality work that facilitates such student learning resulting in high student performance. Thus, not only are teacher leaders required to be exemplary pedagogues, teachers, in general, must work towards being exemplars. Administration must facilitate this process by frequent, timely observations, and ensure tailored professional learning plans and opportunities that address their challenges in meeting our instructional expectations. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 49  Part 2 – Summative Vision for Effective School Leadership What is your vision for effective school leadership at your school?  School leadership at IS 291 looks like: 1. Principal who is fair, direct and visible. Teachers trust her skills and knowledge and willingly collaborate for the betterment of the school. 2. Assistant Principal is a model teachers who is fair, direct and visible. Teachers trust her skills and are willing to collaborate. AP is the liaison between the staff and the principal. AP is loyal to the principal and agrees with the vision for the school. 3. Teacher leaders are architects of the curriculum and models of the pedagogy consistent with the school's vision for teaching and learning. They will be focused on influencing teacher practices and advocate for meeting all our students' needs. They are self-starters who take pride in the work they do (whether or not they get paid) to help their colleagues, their community and their students progress. 4. Teachers and paraprofessionals trust each other to make good pedagogical decisions and to collaborate for the enhancement of student learning experience. 5. The Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, Social Worker and CBO Director are also leaders whose roles are just as important as that of the AP and teacher leaders. These individuals are respected and trusted by their colleagues and all have the best social-emotional development goals at the core of their work. Families are seen and treated like partners in the development of this strong learning community and these individuals are the liaisons between home and school. On which aspects of your own leadership do you plan to focus for the upcoming school year? As a very hands on principal, I am involved in almost every aspect of the school. I am the storyteller-in-chief and so, I weave myself into all the work that must get done at all levels of the organization. To convey the story I want told about my school, my focus this year is on re-branding this building. With the refinement of our vision, mission and core values, this year will be spent marketing the school on and off-line through social media and strategic promotion in the community. What is your vision for ensuring that everyone in your schools has a normed and shared understanding of the school’s vision, mission, and instructional focus? To promote our brand, I will be working with the Community Committee on these three things: image, promise and results. These three factors are the primary pieces of information that must be messaged about our school to clearly communicate who we are; what we're doing for our community; and what our successes look like. Ensuring that staff, students, families and community members are apprised of these three things means spending the month of September hosting community events to showcase the school's focus; structures for success; highlighting each committee member's expertise in this work; and clarifying who will be responsible for spreading the narrative even further outside the community. Events include: 1. Back to School BBQ - Friday, August 31 2. Dads Take Your Child to School Day - Thursday, September 18 3. Meet the Teacher Night - Thursday, September 20 4. Parent Workshop #1 - Thursday, September 27 2018-19 RSCEP-R 50  What is your vision for developing differentiated leadership throughout your school? How will you utilize teacher leaders to build broad capacity within your school? Each teacher leader will have a well-defined role based on their subject of expertise and pedagogical strengths. Ivan Rivera Master Teacher  Member of Instructional Cabinet Team  Data Wise Champi2018-19 RSCEP-R 51  on Catherine Rhee  Science Lead Teacher  Model Teacher - Regents  Teaching grade 7 and Living Environment  Member of Instruct2018-19 RSCEP-R 52  Pamela Pabon Model Teacher - Science ional Leadership Team  Data Wise trained  Teaching 6th grade Sc2018-19 RSCEP-R 53  Carline Balan Social Studies Lead ience  New member of the Instructional Leadership Team  Teachi2018-19 RSCEP-R 54  Teacher  Moneca Jackson IEP Coordinator ng 8th grade Social Studies IEP Teacher Teacher leaders building capacity by influencing others. The aforementioned staff members were chosen to be school leaders because they have the capacity to do that. As they collaborate with administration; attend professional development to improve their skills; and continue to be grounded in good teaching, they will be positioned as members of the IS 291 "tribe" of learning leaders to whom everyone has access through inter-visitation, team meetings, etc. How will the leader foster collaborative school governance processes, and ensure full family participation together with other stakeholders? The SLT and PA are fully functional and have a strong presence in the school community. Through these avenues, parents/guardians will have access to staff who can address their concerns. Parents who express an interest in volunteering to assist in any capacity are accommodated. The PA President and the Principal have a solid working relationship through which relevant and timely information is shared on a consistent basis. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 55  How often will the school leader conduct observations? How quickly will school leader share actionable feedback with teachers? How will school leader ensure accuracy and provide support to teachers based on observation feedback? Frequency Feedback Turnaround Accuracy For TIP teachers - bi-weekly For Non-TIP teachers - monthly As the principal sees necessary Feedback will provided in two ways. First, immediate feedback with the week of the observation will be shared with the teacher via email messagewith special attention paid to the implementation of our instruction foci. With the help of the TDEC, all administrators will norm ratings as often as possible. For TIP teachers, one AP and the principal will conduct the bulk of their observations so that the ratings can be normed. The final, formal observation write-up will be shared with TIP teachers within a week of their observation. For non-TIP teachers, the formal write-up will be given within 2 weeks of the observation. Fo non-TIP teachers, their rating officer's final observation will be reviewed by the principal before it is shared. What kind of evidence based systems would a school leader put in place to ensure that the school and individuals continues to improve? What kind of supports? Who would he/she collaborate with? Evidence-Based System Support(s) Collaborator(s) Advance READY and iREADY Teacher leaders are all familiar with the rating system. They will have evaluator-type trainings with Teacher Leadership Coach. All teacher leaders are expected to be competent in the used of all the software we will use to assess students.  Teacher leaders  Administrators  TDEC  Teacher leaders  Administrators  Curriculum Associates coach Google Docs tracking inter-visitations  The Office of Teacher Leadership PD sessions  Teacher leaders will accompany administrators on focused walk-throughs and provide feedback to their team members  Teacher leaders  Administrators How will you organize student and teacher programs to ensure students’ needs are met? Fiscal capital?  This year, our Renewal time is embedded in the school day. Teachers have a split schedule either 1-8 or 2-9, while students have a consistent schedule 5 days per week. For fiscally responsible decisions, this model eliminated to need to spend money on pro rata teacher pay which is costly and doesn't yield the highest return on our time investment. We saved about $150,000 that can now be used to fund student-centered needs. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 56   To meet the academic policy requirements we've missed in the past, in 2017-2018 students will have: 1. Foreign Language - Spanish for 8th grade students 2. Music for 7th grade students 3. Additional courses for the accelerated class(es) - Spanish LOTE Regents and American History Regents 4. iREADY blended learning class will be scheduled 1 time per week for 45 minutes. Teachers will have the iPads so that they can continue using iREADY as a tool for intervention during their regular class period 5. SHSAT instruction will also be scheduled during the school day so that our Master Teacher in Math can provide direct instruction to 8th grade students taking the test in November 2018 Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, as administration improves timely and quality observation feedback through professional conversations, teachers who have Highly Effective ratings can be celebrated and empowered to be models of DDI, MEP, S2SD or LACA for other teachers; consequently, we will achieve: 1. 5% improvement in the number of teachers confirming that they have a moderate to great deal of influence in the school based on the Learning Environment Survey. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal? Collaborative Teachers 2018-19 RSCEP-R 57  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Administration will continue to engage the TDEC to facilitate differentiated PDs for teachers to ameliorate understanding of the Danielson Framework for Teaching Teacher leaders’ classrooms will serve as lab-sites where they will model high impact instructional strategies. These teachers will also be involved in inter-visitations with peers. Teachers will be celebrated for Highly Effective practices and recommended as models to their peers Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Admin Rigorous Instruction September – May  Administrators  TDEC Teachers Teacher Leaders Collaborative Teachers September – May  Administrators  Model Teachers All teachers Collaborative Teachers January - June Administration Collaborative Teachers January 2019 - June 2019 Administration Renewal coaches Teachers rated Highly Effective in Danielson components An inter-visitation protocol and schedule will be created to allow teachers to share promising practices that align to our instructional foci 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) A random sampling of teachers will be able to use student work products as evidence of their improved performance Documentation from inter-visitations Evidence in observation reports stating that the teacher should be visited by others Inter-visitation reflections 2018-19 RSCEP-R 58  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Through the work of the PTA and the SLT, parent volunteers always have opportunities to give their time in different roles at the school. As members of the Community Committee, parents will be able to work with staff and students on the plan to promote the school in and outside of the building. Re-branding will be a community affair that will occur throughout the school year through diverse events and the involvement of stakeholders at all levels. 1. Timeline: Year-long 2. Key Personnel: PTA President; Principal; CBO Director; Student Council Representative(s); Parent Coordinator; UFT Representative Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session for teachers; community service credit for students;; and Family Engagement funds will be used to meet this goal. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title I TA Title III X PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. ADVANCE data will be monitored between September and January to ensure that the best teachers will be identified. In February 2019 at least one teacher in each content area with Highly Effective practices in DDI, MEP, S2SD or LACA will be identified, celebrated and promoted as an exemplar for inter-visitation. By May 2019, exemplar teachers would have been visited by their peers at least once a month. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Confirmation of our most effective teachers will be evident from improvements in student mastery from pre- to post-assessments. Student mastery is 80% accuracy on standards assessed; while teacher effectiveness is evidenced when at least 80% of students have 80% or better standards mastery. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 59  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. NA NA NA x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Strengths in Strong Family-Community Ties  Justification Data 2017-2018 1. A Parent Association was established and remained very active throughout the school year positively impacting our parent engagement numbers which doubled from 2016-2017 2. The school hosted 40 family events this year with half being co-sponsored with the Parent Association 3. The Parent Association raised and donated funds to the school to reward students for strong academic success Focus 2018-2019 - Tenet 6.5 As students work to improve their mastery of content by engaging in deeper feedback sessions with their teachers and greater self-reflection, student-led conferences open up the communication lines between home and school. This is so because, as students own their learning, they have command knowledge of their data; they gain confidence needed to talk about their strengths and challenges; and are more likely to discuss their progress with their parents/guardians. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 60  Part 2 – Summative Vision for Strong Family and Community Ties What is your vision for having strong family and community ties at your school? Strong Family-Community Ties looks like:  Monthly calendar that is backpacked home and sent through Kinvolved  On-going communications include: 1. Parent Passport - PBIS for families to attend more events during the school year 2. Community Manual and Family Handbook - Provided in both English and Spanish detailing our school's policies, programs and 3. HAWKS Core Values course - Parents understand our HAWKS core values and apply them at home so there is reinforcement at home 4. 2018-2019 Goals and Programs for Success course - Parents are given some summary data from the previous year; introduced to the RSCEP goals for the current year; and discuss what their role could be in the achievement of these goals. 5. The Community School Model course - Parents and community members understand the Community School Model and are clear about all the services our school provides for students 6. Parent Association and the School Leadership Team course 7. Understanding Common Core teaching, learning and testing in ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies course - Curriculum Night will allow parents and teachers to engage in clarification of the standards and expectations for students' work and progress through a subject area. It will also allow students to showcase their work. 8. Special Populations: Special Education; English as a New Language; Regents: Accelerated Courses 9. High School Articulation - Several events are hosted and facilitated by the Guidance Counselor for both 7th and 8th grade students in mind. 10. National Junior Honor Society and Other Incentive/Special Programs - Parents are more likely to attend events in which their children are featured/are the focus so the more of these we do, the more likely we are to get recurring parent participation.  Monthly Parent Breakfast at which parents and children eat, talk and interact with the principal and staff. This event precedes the monthly SLT meeting to ensure a quorum. Within the Community School model, how will families be welcomed into the school and made a part of the school community? What support will administrators, teachers, school staff and school safety officers be given to help create a welcoming environment? Will there be a dedicated space for families in the school?  On arrival, all parents are directed to the Office of the Parent Coordinator where they sign-in and discuss their concerns with the Parent Coordinator who then directs them to the relevant parties for their concern/issue. The PC's office has 5 computers available with internet access; a printer; pamphlets and books; as well as refreshments available for parents.  Administration and support staff including the Principal, AP, Guidance Counselor, or the Social Worker are present at parent meetings and willingly meet with parents at their convenience.  Wediko Children's Services staff is also available to schedule meetings with families around issues related to social-emotional supports like counseling and community outreach. Since this is a scanning school, parents are always met at the door by School Safety Agents.   A Parent Center is established for the Parent Association to conduct their board meetings and host their parent meetings. How will the school identify and develop families to take leadership roles in school decision making/school governance structures? 2018-19 RSCEP-R 61  The Parent Association is actively recruiting volunteers for the PA. The PA members are building strong  relationships with families that trust them to be honest and direct about the goings-on in the school. Families that have consistently attended meetings and have expressed an interest in being more involved are welcomed into the SLT or PA where they can be an integral part of the decision-making in the school.  We are launching our Parent Passport initiative as an incentive for parents to participate more because of the example it sets for their children. Families can earn free supplies, uniform clothes, gift cards, and recognition awards for their contribution of time. How will the school engage the community and families? How will they ensure that teachers are able to learn from families about the children being taught? The City-wide 4 mandated parent meetings per year at which parents and teachers can engage in a dialogue about the needs and progress of their children is our primary communication event to build home-school-community relations. Teachers capitalize on these conferences to have reasonably brief conferences with families. For more in-depth meetings, teacher-parent meetings can be scheduled by the teacher, Parent Coordinator, Family Worker, dean or members of the administrative team. What types of supports does the school provide to families to encourage them to take an active role in what their child is learning? Type of Support Rationale Monthly calendar for parents Saturday Parent Breakfast Parent Passport & Family Handbook Conferences Parents will be kept abreast of all in-school activities that are happening during a month so they are aware of the activities in which their child is engaged. This document is provided in both English and Spanish. School staff and parents can meet in a more relaxed setting to learn about new policies and programs; get updates on matters of interest to families; and for the school to get suggestions and feedback from families. Family engagement at this event is supported by the bilingual Parent Coordinator, Principal, bilingual AP, Wediko staff and others. Any documents provided at this event are translated in both English and Spanish. The Parent Handbook compiles all the information that is essential for parents to understand our school goals, policies, and programs. For 2017-2018, the Parent Passport initiative which we learned about from other schools that have used it to boost parent participation, gives incentives for both students and their parents parents/guardians to come into the school more frequently throughout the year. This document is provided in both English and Spanish. Including the 4 mandated conferences, when the need arises, parents will be contacted or contact the school to discuss their child so that there can be mutual problem-solving for the sake of the child's academic and/or social-emotional well-being. Bilingual translation is always available for families requiring that support. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 62  How do families partner with the school and CBO to support student success? Will there be dedicated space for families? Family partnerships with school: SLT or PA membership allow parents to hear about school-wide issues and share their own concerns. Family partnerships with CBO: A Community School Forum that occuronce a year gives parents an opportunity to share their satisfaction or dissatisfaction with the services being provided by the school. In this way, the CBO acts as a liaison between the home and school communities based on their training through the Office of Community Schools. Is there dedicated space for these partnerships? The CBO has their own office on the second floor and the Parent Coordinator has an office on the first floor equipped with a meeting area and computers with Internet access. Parents are welcome to use any of these resources. What is your vision for the role the school will take in providing access adult education classes within the community? The school work in tandem with BEACON which offers these adult learning courses so we help to advertise them to the parents. In this partnership, we can offer the same courses that will be offered during the Saturday Parent Breakfast through BEACON which gives families a wider range of dates and times to attend. What data and student progress feedback loops will be present at the school to ensure that families knowledgeable of their children’s scholastic success?  The school provides 4 report cards per year. This allows for consistent and timely communication of students' progress in all courses. At either Meet the Teacher Night or Open School, parents/guardians can discuss their child's academics.  Students are expected to be frequent users of the iREADY tool. For the entire year, students will be enrolled in a blended learning course for academic intervention and/or advance work. At school, there will be a teacher under whose guidance they will learn; outside of school, students and their parents have access to the program. Since the program is adaptive, students will automatically receive practice work on their level. In addition, there is a text-based component which allows for parents to work with their child. Finally, iREADY has a parent report available so the school can provide unit-to-unit updates about the student's progress. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, the impact of increased parental involvement through the work of our PTA and SLT will result in at least a 50% increase in parent response rate on the Learning environment Survey. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 63  Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal? Student Attendance Student Survey - Safety 2018-19 RSCEP-R 64 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Families and Students   Student Attendance Student Survey - Safety Mid-September-May  Administrators  Teachers Families and Students Student Attendance September-June  Administrators  Teachers Student Survey - Safety Parents/ Student Attendance September-June Parent Coordinator guardians Student Survey - Safety Parents/ Parent Survey guardians August - June Parent Coordinator Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Teachers will meet with parents, at minimum, four times for the year to discuss academic progress by appointment and as an open door policy. Teachers will fully utilize Family Engagement Time to provide parents with feedback and updates on individual student progress. Parents can sign up to complete courses provided monthly Parent Passport initiative will be introduced to families and the structures to sustain it will be established and monitored by the Parent Coordinator KInvolved subscription renewal Families and Students  Student Attendance  Parent Survey August-June Parent Coordinator and Community School Director How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Number of attendees (adults and children) Number of attendees (adults and children) Number of attendees (adults and children) Number of students and parents who earn rewards Number of attendees (adults and children) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 65  Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The school CBO, Guidance Counselor, Social Worker and Family Worker will provide follow-up sessions after each monthly parent meeting as another layer of support and intervention for 10 sessions per year. They will be present at all the family-centered events to sign parents up for their services. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. To keep the progress monitoring process consistent, the Parent Coordinator and CBO staff will be monitoring attendance at the events taking place throughout the year. At the end of 2018-2019 we had a 30% increase in the number of parent signatures from 2017-2018. Now, the goal will more ambitious, so by January 2019, we are anticipating a 15-20% increase. By June 2019, our goal is to improve parent attendance by 30%. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The number of attendees including adults and children who sign in on the attendance sheets. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 66  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environments, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Goals for ELT should align to the Renewal Benchmarks. How will the school will ensure that all students’ individual needs are served during the Renewal ELT and how the school’s vision for ELT will impact both academic achievement and social emotional growth? Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Due to the change in ELT program scheduling, academic intervention will take place during the course of the school day through iREADY and Imagine Learning (ELLs). The goal is to move as many students as possible from Tiers 3 and 2 to Tier 1 with at least a 5% increase from Tier 3 to Tier 2 and from Tier 2 to Tier 1. The improved student performance will be evident from iREADY diagnostic results. Additionally, students will set a goal at the beginning of the year and, following each administration of the 3 iREADY assessments, they will determine whether or not they achieved their goal; how far off they are and why; and what gains they need to make to improve with some specific strategies/skills. Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? Voluntary X Compulsory Renewal ELT – Describe what accountability structures the school will employ to ensure participation of all students, including special populations, will participate fully in Renewal ELT. Additional ELT - If there is a voluntary ELT program in addition to the compulsory Renewal ELT, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. The school grading policy will include having marks of either pass or fail for AIS courses in iREADY or Imagine Learning . Additionally, students will complete a goal-setting assignment to reflect on their mastery of ELA and Math as they progress through the iREADY program. Part 3 – ELT Program Description Target Population: The ELT program for a Renewal School will be offered to all students in the school. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program: How will the school integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging? How will CBO staff and the school’s teachers be integrated to provide a seamless learning day?  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduces risk for retention or drop out, and increases the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  What new content areas and opportunities will be offered to students? How will the school ensure all IEP and language mandates are met during ELT? 2018-19 RSCEP-R 67   Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  How will community educators receive professional development? Are there plans to provide joint PD to school faculty and community partner staff?  What content will be led by pedagogical staff and what content will be led by CBO partners?  How will the school best utilize CBO partners to impact student achievement?  How will effective outreach be conducted to families?  How will programming be made easily accessible to students and families in order to encourage participation?  Range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduces risk for retention or drop out, and increases the likelihood of graduation. 1. Since ELT is embedded in the school day, there is reduced risk of dis-engagement, attendance issues, or drop out  Activities that address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting. 1. Academic intervention that is seamless, instructed by teachers with whom students already have a relationship, and provided in conjunction with gym and advisory, for example, allows students to feel less dis-interested and unmotivated during instruction.  New content areas and opportunities offered to students ensuring all IEP and language mandates are met during ELT 1. This year, we will ensure that students have the mandated coursework outlined in the academic policy documents including music, foreign language, health, art, library, advisory and gym. ENL students will have access to their current teachers and SwDs will only be instructed by SpEd teachers with whom they are familiar.  Components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art. 1. Listed above.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area. 1. Since instruction is embedded in the school day, all instructors are NYS certified.  Professional development for community educators including joint PD to school faculty and community partner staff 1. For advisory only, there are opportunities for professional development to be conducted by the CBO that wrote the curriculum.  Content led by pedagogical staff vs. content will be led by CBO partners 2018-19 RSCEP-R 68  1. All content is let by a pedagogue except for advisory which is co-facilitated by a pedagogue and a CBO staff member  Utilizing CBO partners to impact student achievement 1. Because our CBO is a social-emotional learning company, their priority is providing our staff and families with the supports our student need to be successful. They track attendance and the incidents of trauma that may have life-long effects on our students. They are also in a position to support the social-emotional development of the staff.  Outreach to families? 1. Family outreach is consistent and timely using the Kinvolved platform that sends text messages directly to the cellphone of our parents. This circumvents the issues caused by paper mailings and backpacked notices.  Programming that is easily accessible to students and families to encourage participation 1. All the courses offered from 6th through 8th grades are required by academic policy. Electives will be determined by teachers' choices for lunch groups and attendance interventions needed. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. How will the school assess the impact of ELT on individual student achievement and social emotional development? 2. 3. Academic Intervention Services offered through iREADY will be monitored by the supervisors of ELA and Math. CBO staff will be kept in the know during quarterly Strategic Data Chats with the New Visions Data liaison. Impact is assessment by improvements in the grade level equivalent of a student's score of either on or above level, 1 level below or 2 or more levels below. With the emphasis on teacher-student conferences an student-led conferences, ownership of the progress that students attain is placed on all stakeholders. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. AIS will begin on the first day of school and it will run through the end of the school year. Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. As AIS and enrichment are occurring throughout the school day, resources needed include: 1. Teachers of all content areas 2. Teachers trained on the iREADY program and it's reports 3. teachers trained on teacher-student conferring 4. Script for student-led conferences 5. Student portfolios Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 69  Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. 21st Century Title I 1003(a) Tax Levy X Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA X SIG Grant P/F Set-aside School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound and aligned to the school’s Renewal Benchmarks By the administration of iREADY diagnostic 2 in January 2019, there should be and increase of at least 5% from Tier 2 to Tier 1 and from Tier 3 to Tier 2. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. iREADY Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 70  Section 7: Community School Description Directions: The Community School program is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools element – Strong Family and Community Ties. Part 1 – The Community School Program Goal(s) Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. 1. Teacher/staff goal: Supportive Environment: By June 2019, all teachers and CBO staff will have collaboratively planned and delivered PBIS initiatives such that average attendance is 95%; student lateness decreases by 15%; and chronic absence decreases by 5%. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal? Student Attendance Collaborative Teachers Part 2 – Community School Program Description Part 2a. Identify the CBO partnerships that you will develop, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBO’s should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service Wediko Children’s Services - Lead Partner Entire student body - Universal PBIS full school behavioral intervention; student celebration, and full school positive intervention models Students and families in need of counseling or mental health services Students struggling behaviorally and/or academically in school Individual and small group counseling, individual behavioral plans and interventions, referrals to outside agencies based on need, collaborating with Students and families in need of case management services, mentorship and/or advocacy Counseling Dept. on system for structuring services and communicating with families and school staff. Teachers and school staff 2018-19 RSCEP-R 71  Families and community members Crisis de-escalation, academic support in and out of classrooms, academic goal setting Fostering ongoing relationships with various community agencies, home visits and out of school support for students and families in need of support Workshop series PDs on trauma, understanding behavior in context, and creating a supportive classroom environment Facilitating and supporting parent workshops, coordinating a CST with significant parent representation, supporting parent coordinator in all efforts, establishing parent communication systems, hosting Community School Forum in addition to multiple other community events Success Mentors will be assigned to mentor students who are chronically/severely chronically absent Attendance Heat Map training will be given to all the members of the Attendance Team so they can effectively use the tool to monitor and track attendance and the interventions implemented. Psychiatric evaluations, individual counseling, family counseling, other mental health services Adult learning courses, community organizing New Visions All students NY Center for Psychotherapy Students in need of intensive psychological services Coalition for Hispanic Family Services Full community 2018-19 RSCEP-R 72  Families in need of supportive services around immigration, legal advocacy, housing, mental health, other support services Immigration, housing, and other support services legal assistance and advocacy, mental health counseling, food services, psychological evaluations, preventative in home services Homebase NYC Students and families in temporary housing or in danger of becoming without secure housing Family workshops open for all families; prevention casework for families, legal advocacy Part 2b. Describe how the school will meet the NYCDOE requirements for a Community School in the School Renewal program. 1. Renewal Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Renewal Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Renewal Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Renewal School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. Continuing on the work of the initial year of the Wediko - 291 Community School Partnership the Community School Director will continue to …  Coordinate services of partner CBOs around ELT provision of services  Facilitate the implementation of new school structures such as: PBIS, restorative justice disciplinary interventions, and advisory  Coordinate and facilitate the Community School Team as a representative body of school staff, community partners, and families  Coordinate ongoing needs and assessment feedback cycles through the GAFE platform  Together with school staff support the coordination of attendance interventions  Together with school staff support the PPT and counseling department meetings and implementation of services 2018-19 RSCEP-R 73  Together with school staff coordinate family and community engagement efforts including but not limited to: developing new communication platforms, community school forum(s), parent workshops, developing a family leadership team In partnership with IS 291 the Community School Plan also aligns with the Elements for the Framework for Great Schools so that our initiatives are targeted and integrated across partners. Areas of Focus Action/Implementation Plan Ongoing Assessment Rigorous Instruction Supportive Environment  Targeted Teacher/Wediko classroom partnerships in order to provide social-emotional as well as academic in class support for struggling classes and/or classrooms that are high performing and want to extend their instruction/curriculum  Through the advisory structure implement academic portfolios and ongoing goal setting, culminating in an end of year public Presentation of Learning designed to give students opportunity to present their work to a diverse audience and demonstrate their readiness to advance to the next grade.  Facilitating school based PBIS team - implementation of PBIS school wide, PD on PBIS framework and ongoing coaching and norming around responding to behavior.  Hallway support during transitions  Together with counseling department develop whole school and target interventions for students around supporting social emotional skill development and mental health including organizing referral process, coordinating individual and small group counseling services, facilitating workshops and assemblies, planning student celebrations, and creating individualized behavior plans to support student academic success.  Develop and co-teach the curriculum for student  advisory Support school staff in creating a welcoming and beautiful physical space - mural creation and collaboration with the art teacher, throughout the year raise awareness on particular issues through school wide visual celebrations - hispanic heritage, youth activism, black history month etc…  Through parent coordinator and community schools office provide and offer physical resources - coats   Side by Side Progress monitoring sheets Student, teacher and CBO self reporting through surveys around classroom climate SSIS survey results   Weekly collaborative planning meetings for both advisory and Side by Side co-facilitation.  Weekly counseling department meetings. SSIS survey results   Observations and walk-throughs  Community School Team meetings (monthly)  Weekly PBIS team meetings 2018-19 RSCEP-R 74  (through Operation Warm), food, clothing, and referrals to families based on need.  Partnerships between 291 and Wediko staff for in class behavior management support and structures, academic enrichment and targeted intervention, Side by Side skill building cycles, and advisory planning and partnerships  Participate in grade team meetings along with counseling department staff and PPT to develop interventions and share information about supporting at-risk students Facilitate co-planning meetings between CBO providers and teachers in order to connect enrichment activities with academic content   Biweekly planning meetings between Wediko staff and 291 teachers around advisory planning, Side by Side planning, and reflecting on needs of particular classes.  Grade team meetings  Monthly PPT meetings  Weekly Counseling Department meetings  Americorps member with support of CSD, Family Outreach worker, and parent coordinator in Family Engagement/Community Associate role liaising between parent coordinator’s office and community school office  Bi-annual Community School Forum  Organize implementation of Kinvolved app for parent  Monthly Family Leadership communication  Develop an online school presence through creating and maintaining a website, electronic calendar, and publicizing school offerings and events throughout the neighborhood  Develop and facilitate monthly Community School Team meetings made up of parents, teachers, community leaders/organizations, and other relevant personnel  Host 1-2 Community School Forums, one in fall, and   one in spring Support and facilitate parent workshops and other parent events throughout the year (Community resource/health fair, etc…) Support parent teacher conferences and connect families through these events to various programs and community offerings Team meetings  Monthly Community School Team meetings  Monthly parent workshops based on areas of need/interest  Continued parent engagement through 21st Century programming and Beacon (Zumba, adult learning classes, etc…)  Analysis of Kinvolved data and Data Sorter in attendance team meetings Collaborative Teachers Strong Family and Community Ties Part 3 – Community School Program Implementation and Oversight 2018-19 RSCEP-R 75  Part 3a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students Wediko Children’s Services - Lead CBO partner  Attendance interventions and outreach, PBIS implementation, advisory collaboration, individual counseling, small group counseling, referral process oversight, Side by Side social-emotional skill building program, family engagement coordination, high school admissions mentorship, milieu support (hallways, classrooms, lunchrooms), family outreach, PD for staff, family workshops, full school family events, support with other school events and initiatives as needed, Success Mentors Beacon Center for Arts and Leadership  Rental assistance, legal advocacy, preventative case management, assistance with navigating the NYC housing offices, PATH assistance Coalition for Hispanic Family Services  Immigration legal assistance, mental health referrals and psychiatric evaluations, housing assistance, employment assistance, adult learning, community organizing Interborough Development and Consultation Center  The Nurse Practitioner conducts psychiatric evaluations, crisis de-escalation and intervention, individual counseling, family counseling, small group counseling with at risk students Part 3b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. 1. Renewal hour will be integrated throughout the school day. 1. Need - scheduled collaborative planning periods 2. Strong connection between School - Parent Coordinator Office - Community School Director - Office of Family Outreach - for Family Engagement efforts 1. Need - Americorps Family Engagement member to serve as Community Associate 2. Kinvolved app for parent communication, active and up to date school website, public calendar of school functions 3. Advisory Structure for students in all grades (2x/week) 1. Need - co-planning periods, curricular guides, materials, PD on particular new structures such as Presentations of Learning Part 3c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 76  Sept - November- PBIS planning, retraining, and implementation, Community School Forum (1), CST invitations, parent/family workshops around open school night, applying to high school (8th), what it means to be in middle school (6th), attendance team trained in use of the data sorter, CST organized and had initial meeting, family leadership team identified, Kinvolved used for parent communication around attendance and tardiness, Wediko/teacher partnerships identified, initial rounds of Side by Side started... Nov - Dec - PBIS troubleshooting and expected behaviors taught, roll out of “HAWKS Store”, norming around consistency, high school applications submitted, CST meetings through the rest of the year scheduled, increased collaboration between teachers/CBO staff, ELT integrated seamlessly throughout the school day, interventions in place for students in temporary housing, attendance team working consistently, restorative justice programming initial implementation, service learning projects in advisory, second round of Side by Side initiated, academic awards and student celebrations Jan - March - Planning for Community School Forum, integration of external partners (NY Center for Psychotherapy, Homebase, Make the Road etc...) and community resource guide, and referral systems organized, Wediko/teacher collaborative planning running smoothly, preparation for presentations of learning begun - PD, advisory curriculum, portfolio organization, guest speakers etc… - PBIS store up and running, PBIS norming and troubleshooting, targeted academic intervention based on ongoing assessment data, etc… March - June - Community School Forum, PBIS implemented school wide, restorative practices an ingrained response to discipline, counselors have full caseloads, deep relationships formed with external partners, targeted academic support and goal setting related to promotional criteria, portfolio creation and reflection activities for end of year Presentations of Learning, culminating events for ELT programs - showcase event etc... outreach, parent workshops, and referrals for summer programs and enrichment activities Part 3d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this RSCEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 77  Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) English Language Arts (ELA) Services will be provided to allof our Level 1 and Level 2 students, students with attendance issues and over aged students Our two tieredis designedto service all level 1 and Level 2 students. Based on the State information provided in the June Instructional Report Following the administration of iREADYDiagnostic #1, the students identified will be tracked using iREADYintervention and targeted lesson instruction from their iREADYinstructor and/or classroom teacher. Mathematics Services will be provided to allof our Level 1 and Level 2 students, students with attendance issues and over aged students. Based on the State information provided in June Instructional Report Our two tiered extended learning program is designedto service all level 1 and Level 2 students. Following the administration ofiREADYDiagnostic #1, the students identified will be tracked usingiREADYintervention and targeted lesson instruction Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) iREADYprovides intervention that is tailored to the student based on their performance ion the diagnostic. Small group instruction, one to one and wholegroup determined by the learning task and the learning needs of the attendingstudents iREADYprovides intervention that is tailored to the student based on their performance on the diagnostic Small group instruction, one to one and wholegroup determined by the learning task and the learning needs When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Academic Intervention Services are provided throughoutthe day and before, after and during the school hours. iREADYis being used during the school day so that students are receiving at least 45 minutes of instructional time per week. Academic Intervention Services are provided throughoutthe day and before, after and during the school hours. iREADY is being used during the school dayso that students 2018-19 RSCEP-R 78 from theiriREADYinstructor and/or classroom teacher. of the attendingstudents  Leveled and/or differentiatedproject-based science activities to provide more hands-on work  Test prep questions from past science exams Small group instruction, one to one and wholegroup determined by the learning task and the learning needs of the attendingstudents Science Services will be provided to allof our Level 1 and Level 2 students, students with attendance issues and over aged students  Performance on classroom assessments  Report card grades in November, February and April  BOY MOSLperformance in October are receiving at least 45 minutes of instructional time per week. Academic Intervention Services are provided throughoutthe day and before, after and during the school hours. Academic Intervention Services are provided throughoutthe day and before, after and during the school hours.   Small-group work Individual standards-based progress tracker Small group instruction, one to one and wholegroup determined by the learning task and the learning needs of the attendingstudents  Small-group work All services will be provided to studentsreferred by school staff  Group  counseling Individual counseling Academic Intervention Services are provided throughoutthe day and before, after and during the school hours Social Studies Services will be provided to allof our Level 1 and Level 2 students, students with attendance issues and over aged students Teachersidentify areas of weakness and students work with their classroom teachers to build skill masteryto the identified areas of weakness.  Performance on classroom assessments  Report card grades in November, February and April  BOY MOSLperformance in October All services will be provided to studentsreferred by school staff  Application of the new standards of historical analysis - sourcing, contextualizing, corroborating and close reading - to differentiate tasks  Test prep questions from past science exams All services will be provided to studentsreferred by school staff  Groupcounseling  Individual counseling  Guidance Counselor Social Worker   WedikoChildren's Services At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 79   InterboroHospital nurse 2018-19 RSCEP-R 80  Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 50 - 70 students 1. Monitoring of attendance and lateness by Social Worker 2. Free uniforms and school supplies when needed 3. Counseling as prescribed by their IEP or the option for counseling based on student's academic and social-emotional progress in their classes Incentive trips 4. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). na 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 81  na 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. na 2018-19 RSCEP-R 82  Section 10: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Prior to hiring a candidate, their credentials are verified by out Districts HR Director to ensure that the candidate holds valid NYS certification in that license area. The BEDS survey is reviewed periodically by the principal and the HR director who works with our school to ensure that every teachers assignment aligns with their license area so that all teachers are reported as HQ on the BEDS survey. Strategies and activities used to attract highly qualified teachers to our school include: Frequent communication with our HR director when vacancies occur.   The FSC HR director partners with Central for assistance and guidance for candidate referrals. Central Office of Talent and Recruitment partners with colleges to locate highly qualified candidates.  The school participates in Central Hiring Fairs where pre-screened HQT candidates are interviewed and recruited.  The school establishes a partnership with a local colleges to support the grooming of student teachers in the search of HQT candidates.  Recruitment 1. New Teacher Finder 2. The Open Market Hiring System 3. Absent Teacher Reserve (ATR) Pool 4. Renewal Schools Recruitment Fairs 5. The school establishes a rigorous interview protocol that includes intensive criteria for the selection of new staff members including demonstration lessons, and a review of NYS certification/licensing.  Retention 1. New teachers will be supported by the teacher leaders, APs and principal with planning, management and best practices in instructional strategies 2. New teachers know that the aforementioned individuals have an open door policy  Assignments 1. Teachers are assigned to teach courses that are aligned with their license area in BEDS 2. Courses like advisory and enrichment classes are assigned by availability and teacher preference  Support 1. All new teachers are assigned a mentor teacher with whom they can work throughout the year 2018-19 RSCEP-R 83  2. The three teacher leaders - Master teacher, PCT and Model teacher- are assigned to provide support to teachers who are new and or areas of focus based on their previous performance ratings. 3. The school maintains a professional library to promote promising and effective practices. 4. The schoolwide standard for effective performance is shared with all staff and used as a tool for: Inter-visitation note-taking and coaching conversations   Evaluating and editing lesson plans  Sharing feedback from informal observations by lead teachers, teacher leaders, APs and the principal  In the event that a teachers status is deemed not HQT, the principal will consult with the FSC HR Director for guidance to ensure that the non HQT takes the necessary actions to meet all requirements and deadline. This may include some form of counseling including, encouraging the teachers to become HQT through the High Objective Uniform State Standard of Evaluation (HOUSSE) system. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). A Professional Development Plan has been developed as a result of a comprehensive needs assessment using the annual calendar. Each month, Monday PDs are divided between content team meetings, grade team meetings, and careful review of all student social-emotional learning workshops. The 2018-2019 school year is scheduled as follows (but subject to change): September- 3 content team, 1 supportive environment   October - 1 content team, 1 data mining  November - 3 content team, 1 supportive environment  December - 2 content team, 1 supportive environment    March - 2 content team, 1 data mining  April - 1 content team, 1 supportive environment or data mining  May - 2 content team, 1 data mining, 1 test prep  January - 3 content team, 1 data mining February - 3 content team, 1 supportive environment or data mining. June - 2 content team, 1 supportive environment or data mining Our PD calendar will also be used to engage teachers in professional conversations regarding teacher work, student work and informed by our current status as a Renewal school because we will conduct data mining sessions for iREADY and student data. Example of these meeting protocols include: The Socratic Seminar, Looking at Student Data Protocol and iReady Observations and inter-visitation data will impact PD as well. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. - 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 2018-19 RSCEP-R 84  - Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). - 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Faculty members will meet during the summer and on an ongoing basis during the school year to determine teachers’ MOSL assessments, create and modify curriculum, compose in-house assessments, select targeted professional learning opportunities to improve instruction, and evaluate assessment trends using assessment data. Teacher/Inquiry teams also make decisions about assessment. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (RSCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5A Section 5A Section 5A Section 5A Section 5A Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal 236,411 0 61,651 0 0 x x x x x 2018-19 RSCEP-R 85  Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 12,366 2,595,926 x x Section 5A Section 5A 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/RSCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the 2018-19 RSCEP-R 86  participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 87  Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. I.S. 291, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students IS 291 - Roland Hayes will support parents and families of Title I students by:  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; 2018-19 RSCEP-R 88  Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will reach out to families of the entire school population to attend various school activities, identify, recruit and train parents and guardians to participate actively in school decision making structures and in advocating on behalf of their children, and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office conduct parent workshops based on the assessed assets and need of the parents and children who attend the school. Topics may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under ESSA; schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help    The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement 2018-19 RSCEP-R 89  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School Activities to Encourage Families Rigorous Instruction Collaborative Teachers Supportive Environment Effective School Leadership Strong Family-Community Ties Evidence of Impact School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) IS 291, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2018-19 RSCEP-R 90  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 2018-19 RSCEP-R 91  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; 2018-19 RSCEP-R 92  ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions ● show respect for myself, other people and property ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 93  2018-19 RSCEP-R 94  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 RSCEP-R 95  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: I.S. 291 is committed to the quality education available to our ELLs students. Our school implements Transitional Bilingual and Freestanding ENL Program in accordance with CR Part 154 and Title III Guidelines for approximately students. All bilingual and ENL teachers are appropriately certified. We have two Freestanding ENL Programs in accordance with CR Part 154 and Title III Guidelines. The ENL Program provides service to all ENL students using the Push-In and Pull Out Model. All bilingual students receive instruction as per the Language Allocation Policy. Instruction is tailored to comply with the city and state performance and ENL Standards. All students are also provided with Differentiated Instruction to meet or exceed city and state learning and performance standards. We have a Sixth, Seventh and Eighth Grade Transitional Bilingual (Spanish) classes in accordance with CR Part 154 and Title III Guidelines. Our goal is to create a learning community in which students and staff as well as parents participate in high quality professional development, teachers enhance their teaching and learning and students improve their knowledge and academic achievement. I.S. 291 provides Title III English Language Learners with supplemental instruction in an ENL Saturday Academy Program. The instructional program will target ELLs from grades 6-8 who scored Entering, Emerging and transitioning levels as reflected on the Spring 2018 NYSESLAT Test. The Saturday Academy Program services ELLs who need to meet the New York City Standards as well as the ENL Standards. The focus will be in Reading Comprehension, Writing and Math Solving Problems activities using Imagine Learning and Imagine Math. The program will meet bi-weekly on Saturday from November 3, 2018 to March 30, 2019 a total of 13 scheduled sessions from 9:00am-11:00am. Each session will provide one period of mathematics instruction and one period of ELA/ENL instruction. The Saturday Academy Program will service approximately 40 ELL students. During this period of instruction 2 groups of students will be served. Each group will have approximately 20 ELL students. One group will consist of 6th-7th grade and the second group will be 8th grade. A total of two certified license teachers (Math Bilingual) and an (ENL teacher) will provide supplemental instruction to ELLs in the Transitional Bilingual Education. Various strategies will be used to provide the students optimum opportunity to achieve proficiency and meet standards on the NYSESLAT as well as New York City and State Standards. Instructional materials will be used to provide instruction in Math. Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT materials will be used. Native Language supplementary materials will also be purchased. We will offer addition support for our English Language Learners after school on Wednesday from November 14, 2018 to June 12, 2018 a total of 26 sessions from 3:30 pm-4:30 pm. Each session will provide mathematics instruction and ELA/ENL instruction. The Wednesday After School Program will service approximately 40 ELL students. During this period of instruction 2 groups of students will be served. Each group will have approximately 20 ELL students. One group will consist of 6th-7th grade and the second group will be 8th grade. A total 2018-19 RSCEP-R 96  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information of two certified license teachers (Math Bilingual) and an (ENL teacher) will provide supplemental instruction to ELLs in the Transitional Bilingual Education. A supervisory position will be posted in order to provide feedback to teachers, collaborate with planning and preparation, monitor attendance and family contact, and progress monitor the data trends of how additional support for ELLs are supporting school day courses. Assistant Principal schedule for JHS 291 is from Monday through Friday 7:30am to 3:20pm. This weekly support will focus in on fluency skills based on the data from Saturday school program. The Wednesday intervention will target the needs on each grade level that will help support conceptual understanding and meaning within content courses. Letters will be mailed to the parents in their preferred language to inform them of the students' participation in the program. Parents' communication and students' attendance, will be kept by the school. General instructional materials will be purchased such as markers, chart paper, rulers, graph paper, notebooks and other manipulative. This program will also have a supervisor, to assure rigorous and quality education. Instructional materials will be purchased for this program to support the needs of our ELL students, which will target language development and accelerate students' academic achievement through scaffolding, and tailored instruction. The following materials will be purchased: For English as a second language development and preparation for the NYSESLAT we will order Finish Line New York ELLs (for NYSESLAT) for grades 6th, 7th and 8th and Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT for grades 6th, 7th and 8th. To support the learning during the additional support time we will utilize McGrawHill bilingual resources in Math and English as a Second Language development. The support resources include the following: - 40 Quick Review Math Handbook, Spanish student Edition will be provided for all 40 students at $38.45 each. - 3 Teacher guides (one for each grade level) of Quick Review Math Handbook at $41.10. - 40 Math Connects: Concepts, Skills, and Problem Solving Spanish Edition Grade 6-8 Book 1 at $82.20 - 40 Math Connects: Concepts, Skills, and Problem Solving Spanish Edition Grade 6-8 Book 2 at $82.20 - 40 Math Connects: Concepts, Skills, and Problem Solving Spanish Edition Grade 6-8 Book 3 at $82.20 - 40 Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: I.S. 291 is committed to provide school based professional development in collaboration with support from the Borough Field Support Center (BFSC) to build capacity of the school and improve student academic performance for ELL's. Teachers of ELL's attend professional development sessions focusing on implementing strategies that will create multiple entry points for ELL's. as well as modifications to curriculum maps and Unit Plans. Additionally, teachers 2018-19 RSCEP-R 97  Part C: Professional Development will meet during inquiry team meetings twice a month to analyze student work products to make adjustments to instructional practices to improve student learning outcomes. Professional Development will focus on providing teachers the opportunity to enhance their knowledge by additionally providing professional development in infusing ENL Strategies in the content areas. Differentiation of instruction will be based on language proficiency in alignment with the citywide curriculum and Common Core Learning Standards. Teachers will also receive staff development to increase instructional practices in the following: Analyzing Data to drive instruction, i.e. NYSESLAT, ELA, Math, Social Studies, Science and Spanish (ELE) Exams. Mr. Davis and Mr. Pruett will meet during their common preparation period to examine students work as well as performance in their subject class. The above teachers will receive five sessions of one hour professional development workshop from 8:00am-8:55am for four weeks. The Assistant Principal, will be the facilitator of the five sessions of professional development. In addition, teachers will participate in professional development sessions offered by the Office of English Language Learners at no cost to the program. By attending and participating in the professional development sessions, teachers will be able to incorporate the strategies in their lessons in order to help the students access the language. The following is a projected list of staff development topics: 1. Imagine Learning Training and support September 24 2018 2. Appropriately Identifying ELLs - September/October 29, 2018 3. Differentiation and scaffolds for ELLs. December 10, 2018 5. Test Sophistication-Strategies to prepare students to meet city and state ENL Standards-January 21, 2019 6. Language Progression and its Implications on ENL and English Language Learners-February 25, 2019 5. NYSESLAT Training-March 11, 2019 Teachers that attend these workshops will be able to better serve our students. We will also highlight instructional strategies in the classroom to strengthen students' skills and performance in the city and state exams. Teachers that provide instruction to English Language Learners will also participate in the above workshops. Agendas and attendance sheets will be filed by the Assistant Principal or the Parents' Coordinator. The above workshops will be at no additional cost to the Title III Program or the school. The workshops will be conducted on a monthly basis for a total of five sessions. Each session will be for an hour. In addition, a weekly common prep time has been set aside to provide Title III ENL teachers to work collaboratively with the ELA teacher to develop lesson plans and revise units of study to improve the achievement of ELLs. During this time ELA/ENL teachers will continue to analyze the data and make unit modifications to improve instruction and increase the achievement of our ELL's. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered 2018-19 RSCEP-R 98  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Begin description here: At I.S. 291, we encourage parents of ELL's to be active participants in their children's learning. Parents of ELL's are invited to different workshops to support them in the social and educational concerns, such as DASA, Literacy Skills, NYC School initiatives, Understanding the CCLS, Analyzing Progress Reports, How to access Kinvolved and Imagine learning reports, and on the completion of the High School application process. IS291 provides the following: a Title III Parent orientation during the month of November and additional orientation for parents of new comers from September through May regarding all school related programs and activities. Parents will be provided with strategies on how to support their children in all academic areas, social and emotional concerns. Workshops will be facilitated by CITES on monthly basis. . Mr. Fransisco Gonzalez, Parent Coordinator will provide workshops for parents on how to support your child academically at home, finding resources, transitional services, family support services, high school application process and college and career readiness. These workshops will be held monthly, during October 2018 through April 2019, consisting of the topics identified in the previous section. Workshops will be held on the first Wednesday of each month from 10:00am-11:00am.. Translation and interpretation services will be provided at each of these workshops. Parents and students will be informed via letters, flyers, calendars and Kinvolved of all the events we provide at I.S. 291. All communication will be in the parents' preferred language. Title III funds are dedicated to funding direct instructional support. We will conduct the following informational workshops from 9:00am-10:00am. Time slots on dates are listed listed below: 1. November 17, 2018 Technology Based Program-Understanding how to track academic progress using: Imagine Learning. 2.December 15, 2018 Promotional Criteria for ELLs 3. January 5, 2018 What resources can I use to support my child's progress in Math? 4. February 2, 2018 How do we support our children in preparing for the NYSESLAT? 5. March 2, 2018 How do we support our children in preparing for the NYSED ELAMATH exam? The above workshops will be conducted in order to inform the parents on the different programs the students have access in the school as well as at home. Parents will be encouraged to monitor the students access to Imagine learning at home. The Assistant Principal in charge of the Bilingual/ENL program will conduct the above workshops. The Parent Coordinator will include the workshops dates in our monthly school calendar that is backpacked and Kinvolved. in addition, notification as well as attendance records will be kept by the Parent Coordinator and the Assistant Principal. Title III funds will be used for refreshments and snacks during parent meetings and workshops. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 99 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 RSCEP-R 100  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 32 School Name Roland Hayes Borough Brooklyn School Number 291 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Ms. Janice Bruce Coach Pamela Pabon ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Brendon Davis, Anthony Pruett Teacher/Subject Area Nancy Palomino Teacher/Subject Area Carmen Pena Related-Service Provider Eugene Yampolsky Superintendent Sheila Gorski Assistant Principal Madeline Rodriguez Coach School Counselor Miguelina Urena Parent Luis Fonseca Parent Coordinator Francisco Gonzalez Field Support Center Staff Member Tatyanana Ulubabova Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 1 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 4 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 284 2018-19 RSCEP-R 101 Total number of ELLs 83 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 29.23%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): N/A Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2000-01 1 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Lang. Spanish Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 7 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 8 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 3 0 0 0 0 0 3 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Initially, the school analyzes student performance on the NYSITELL to determine students proficiency in reading, writing, speaking and listening. Throughout the year, the school uses a combination of assessments for ELL's, such as Imagine Learning, Teacher-created assessments, HLA Performance Task (EOY), New York State ELA and Math Test and the Spring ELL assessment (NYSESLAT). During weekly Team Meetings, teachers analyze student data to plan for instruction by exploring effective ELL strategies and identifying targeted areas of students needs to make modifications to the common core learning standards. Students progress is monitored by the team to determine mainstreaming of students who are commanding. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The structures that support our formative assessments include: Common planning time at least 1 period per week. Teachers are members of content teams and conduct inquiry using the Harvard Data Wise Inquiry process. Through classroom observations the administration assist teachers in gathering evidence of the students learning and it is used in the instructional 2018-19 RSCEP-R 102  planning. Student progress is monitored by the team to determine mainstreaming of students who are Commanding. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The summative assessments that are being used are NY State ELA and Math Assessments, ELL Periodic Assessments, Benchmarks or Interim assessments, NYSESLAT Summative data and Home Language Arts Assessments. Success of programs for ELLs are evaluated based upon student progress on benchmark assessments, teacher created assessments and classroom observations to evaluate the effectiveness of the implementation of instructional strategies. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Tier 1 - Bilingual Program Students complete Bilingual Math and Science; ELA/ENL for direct instruction in ELA; NLA; and ENL which is focused on the humanities. If the student has an IEP, they will receive SETSS push-in or pull-out. All students use Imagine Learning for instruction. Tier 2 Students not meeting standards based on their assessments will receive customized lessons in Imagine Learning. Teacher uses Imagine Learning Target Areas to create small group intervention, not meeting standards by mid-year will be scheduled for Title III Academy either on Saturdays or after school. Tier 3 Ell students who are below grade level (at risk) are serviced by their classroom teacher with Core instruction and they are also serviced in small groups. We track their progress through Imagine learning reports, classroom observations, by using Periodic Assessments as a mid-line and end-line. The data results are compared and analyzed. Based on the results, we determine if the Pupil Personnel Team should study a particular case. If the teacher feels that a student need Tire 3 intervention, the teacher must demonstrate that the appropriate plan for small group instruction was in place and properly conducted. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. NYSITELLNYSESLATNYS ELA and Math testsHLA assessmentSpanish Regents 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Our ELLs are serviced by both the ENL teachers through push-in or pull-out services. The students are grouped for ENL services to support their language development in the four strands fo reading, writing, listening and speaking. In the classroom the students are grouped by levels to ensure that their linguistic needs are being me through the use of turn and talks, cooperative learning and formulating questions. In examining student needs, a collaborative team approach is used. The ENL teacher and classroom teachers communicate in an going basis about data collection and they collaborate to ensure that the language goals of the students are being met. Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 RSCEP-R 103  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. In the Freestanding ENL component we have 47 students, from 6th to 8th grades. They range from emerging to expanding proficiency levels. . Depending on their proficiency level, they receive from 180 minutes to 360 minutes a week of ENL Push In assistance in their classroom. Our commanding students receive 90 minutes per week of ENL services. All teachers in the ENL program are fully certified. Students are programmed in blocks and travel together as a heterogeneous group. b. TBE program. If applicable. At our school we currently have three Transitional Bilingual English classes from grades 6-8. In the TBE class the students transfer their home language skills to English by spending instructional time primarily in the home language before steadily transitioning to English. At the beginning /entering level students receive 75% of instruction in their home language and 25% in English. As the student's English proficiency increases, more of their instructional day is spent learning English. The goal of the TBE program is to attain English language proficiency within 3 years. Native language arts literacy, math, science and social studies are provided in the first language of the student and ESL is infused into the social studies content. The curriculum is standard based. All programs in the TBE classrooms are aligned to the city curriculum and the Common Core Standards of each content area. In addition, IS291 makes a concerted effort to address to social and emotional needs of our TBE population. IS291 designs programs that helps this population to quickly become part of our school culture and helps them gain confidence as individuals and promotes them as learners in order to achieve their individual goals. Students will develop their English skills through ENL services and ELA instruction, for advanced students while increasing the ratio towards second language proficiency until the student achieves proficiency and is placed in general education English program. The Bilingual core curriculum content area at IS 291 integrates the following instructional strategies: •Use of both languages during students engagement in which students will use the language of their preference. •Instructional material will be available in both languages •Bilingual Picture Dictionaries, glossaries, text books, multimedia instructional material, manipulative materials •Scaffolding tasks will be an essential part of the instructional delivery, such as Modeling, Bridging, Schema Building, Contextualization, Text Representation and Metacognition. •Unit reviews at the end of each unit are provided in English to reinforce the academic language in the second language. •Print rich environment in both languages: Interactive word walls, instructional charts, and visual aids are displayed throughout each classroom. •Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocal (SIOP) Instructional Model is implemented in the Science content area targeting the sixth, seventh and eighth grade ELL population. •Differentiated Instruction: In order to carry out this transitional language model, instruction is differentiated to ensure comprehension for all ELLs of all proficiency levels. . •Academic Intervention Services for SIFE students and others working below grade level, are provided in all areas.. Language Arts in the Transitional Bilingual Education ProgramIn addition to the bilingual core curriculum content areas, there is a language arts instructional component. This component consists of instruction in Native Language Arts and English as a Second Language. Our ELLs receive: •180 minutes of NLA per week for students enrolled in the TBE program •360 minutes of ENL for Entering and Emerging ELL's •180 minutes of ENL for Expanding ELLs with 180 minutes of ELA. Within the TBE program, explicit ENL is delivered via 360 minutes per week of stand-alone ESL classroom instruction. Students are grouped according to grade; therefore each class is composed of a heterogeneous population of entering, emerging, and expanding ELL's. Class work focuses on reading and listening skills. Writing exercises are focused on specific grammatical features of a given reading assignment. Collaboration with other teachers in the bilingual department brings in appropriate academic language for each content area. Both formal and informal assessments measure student progress towards the goal of proficiency. To ensure ELL's are appropriately evaluated in their native language, students will be administered all assessments in their native language. Assessments will include all periodic assessments, Math State test and all in-house tests. Materials will be printed and used from the Acuity website in their native language to track progress. The ELE is also used to 2018-19 RSCEP-R 104  evaluate objectives relating to student progress in native Language Arts. The data will be collected and it will inform our planning for meeting the needs of the diverse ELL population. c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The school programmer programs all ELL to the mandated number of instructional minutes as per the CR-Part 154 and ELL Policy Reference Guide Total # Min ENL Standalone Minimum # Min Integrated ENL Flexibility Beginner/Entering 360 180 180 Integrated ENL/ELA 0Low Intermediate/Emerging 360 90 180 Integrated ENL/ELA 90Intermediate/Transitioning 180 0 90 Integrated ENL/ELA 90Advanced/Expanding 180 0 180 Integrated ENL/ELA or other content areaProficient/Commanding 90 0 90 Integrated ENL/ELA or other content area 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content area instruction is provided by a licensed teacher and assisted by an ENL teacher. Instruction is provided in English. Content area teachers are augmenting language development via Imagine Learning a computer based program. ESL teachers strengthen conversational and discussion skills by modeling accountable talk in every classroom. Every student must develop a writing portfolio in all content areas in order to build upon their writing skills. Our TBE Program parallels our general education program, the difference is that we adapt currculum and instruction to address the needs of our students specially looking at the four modalities: Speaking, Listening, Reading and Writing. The TBE Program uses the workshop model to present content area to our students and to improve student achievement. There is an emphasis on vocabulary development in answering text-based questions in each content area. TBE Teachers organize their classroom in a variety of groupings. For example: the small group instruction based on available data. Teachers in TBE Programs frequently provide feedback to students in order to help them identify their strength and weaknesses and provide them with next steps for improvement. Teachers often use exit slips to further assess students understanding and to adapt upcoming lessons. Our goal is to provide all Ells with high quality education and language rich instruction that will allow our students to meet the content and performance standards while acquiring English proficiency. In an effort to increase the teaching quality of reading and writing we have included in our instructional plan: ENL programs that reflect visuals, appropriate teaching charts with graphic organizers, scaffolds, and differentiated instruction during reading and writing. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Upon admittance to I.S. 291, students are evaluated in Spanish using the Spanish LAB which is a good baseline for the teachers to know the student language development. Students are programmed for the 5 periods of NLA. Teachers use formal and informal assessments to evaluate student progress towards the goal of proficiency. Teachers provide feedback and students use rubrics to determine when there is a gap in achievement or learning. On a quarterly basis teachers evaluate student progress and they meet with their parents to discuss possible interventions as a remedy to improve student achievement. They participate in all school wide testing program and to ensure that ELL's are appropriately evaluated in their native language, students will be administered all assessments in their native language. Assessments include all periodic assessments such as Math State Test, and all in-house tests. Materials will be printed in their native language to track progress. The ELE is also used to evaluate objectives relating to student progress in the native language arts. The data is collected and it's used to plan for meeting the needs of the diverse ELL population. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 105  5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status All students are provided with differentiated instruction to meet and exceed city and state learning and performance standards: a. Students who come from another country with little or no formal education will be identified through the HLIS and parent/Child interview. Once identified as a SIFE student, the child will be appropriately placed . Students will be provided with AIS and participate in our Saturday Academy and After school Program. b. ELLs in school for less than three years will be tested annually to determine English Language acquisition and level.Students will receive the appropriate ENL instruction following the levels of English according to the NYSESLAT and LAB, which will include, reading, writing, speaking, and listening. In addition, these students will be mandated to attend all additional instructional activities provided including Saturday Academy and after school. c.ELLs who have completed 4-6 years will receive mandated services for ELLs, but will also receive AIS services and participate in all programs available to general education students.The instructional program focuses on reading, writing, and listening. The ENL teacher and classroom teacher collaborate on best practices and share ideas that will keep the students on track and is aligned to the curriculum. Ongoing assessments will be provided in order to track their literacy skills. d. Long term ELLs that are not given an extension of services from the state will be provided with intensive test practice classes. They will participate in after school, small group instruction, and individualized instruction. Support services are provided by the ENL teachers, AIS providers and classroom teacher. The ENL instruction for each child is depending on their English level on the NYSESLAT. e. Former ELL students are invited to attend the Title III Saturday Academy and after school program. They are also granted all testing accommodations that apply to current ENL students. For at least two years following the school year in which a student is exited from ELL status, former ELLs receive at least one unit of English as a new language (90 minutes per week) and are eligible for certain specified accommodations. During regular school hours, students are scheduled to receive intervention at least two period a week using Imagine Learning and Imagine Math. Content Area Teachers also meet with ENL/NLA teachers during common preparation time to discuss and articulate plans to better serve the students. We also meet with parents and discuss ways in which they can help their children at home. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of students with Special Needs use the following strategies : Additional instructional materials, contextually rich language instruction and the use of developmentally appropriate materials to meet their needs. All English Language Learners in Special Education classes are serviced as per their individual Education Plan. Teachers of ELLs use the same materials books in the content area of ELA as teachers of Monolingual English students. In all other other content areas Math, Science Social Studies, teachers use the same textbooks that are used for Ells in a Transitional Bilingual Class or Monolingual class. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our Ell students with IEPs receive pull out or push in during ESL they receive service just as their general education counterparts do as specified by their level on the NYSESLAT. I.S. 291 instructional model ensures that the mandated number of instructional minutes are provided according to proficiency levels as per CR Part 154-2. Entering and Emerging students receives one unit in ENL Stand Alone, one unit in Language Arts, one unit in Home Language and 2 units in the Content Areas. Transitioning receive 90 minutes in ENL/ELA, and one unit in Integrated ENL/Content Areas. Expanding students 180 minutes in ELA/ENL and 90 minutes in ENL/Content Area. Commanding receives an additional two years of integrated ENL/ELA in Core Content Area classes. Instruction is provided by an ENL/Bilingual Teacher. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 106  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. At I.S. 291K, we look at the relevant data in ELA, Math , NYSESLAT, NYSITELL, ELE, and students work to identify students who will be needing Academic Intervention Services. We examine the NYSESLAT to identify the students that did not meet the proficiency level and plan accordingly. We notify the parents/guardians on the additional services we will be offering the student. Students that did not meet the Proficiency Level on the NYSESLAT, and are not meeting standards in ELA and Math are targeted for Academic Intervention during the school day, Extended -Day, and are encouraged to attend Title III After School Program. In addition, ENL and Bilingual teachers examine the students assessments during their Common Preparation Period to tailor their instruction to meet the students needs. Students that achieved Proficiency in NYSESLAT ,are also encouraged to attend the After School Program as well as other enrichment activities. To enable success for our Proficient students we extend testing accommodations for a two year period after student scored Commanding on the NYSESLAT. We also disseminate information to all parents detailing available service providers of Supplemental Educational Services. We currently have iReady which is a Literacy Computer Based Program. All students have access to this program in school as well as at home. The ENL/ELA uses this technology program as part of his/her Academic Intervention Program. Students that need intervention in their home language, (Spanish), receive academic intervention during school hours as well as After school. In order to provide maximum intervention, teachers and administrators review students results in the following exams: ELE, NYSITELL, LAB, NYSESLAT, Teacher Assessments, Periodic Assessments, Student Work, in order to tailor intervention that addresses students' specific needs. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? This year, as usual we will be using Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT from Attanasio . Native Language support is given to all students according to their proficiency level. SIFE students receive Academic Intervention three times a week. We also encourage SIFE students to attend the Title III After School Program. All programs support and resources are offered to our ELLs students at I.S. 291. Materials levels are age appropriate. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? There are no plans to discontinue service. We will reflect on current practice to augment or modify that which needs enhancement. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our Ells receive an education equal to that of students in the monolingual English language classrooms. Students receive the same classes on Physical Education, Art, and any other enrichment given to all students at I.S. 291K. There are three computer labs, gym, library and art room. These classrooms and their instructors are available to all our students. Our enrichment classes provide excellent opportunities for language development for our ELL students through kinesthetic and hands-on experiences. Presently, I.S. 291 offers the following extra-curricular activities: Volleyball, Basketball, soccer, and visual arts. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We use the following computer based program to augment instruction. Imagine Learning for TBE and I Ready for the general education population. The lessons are leveled according to the students' proficiency level. Students also receive Academic Intervention in their vernacular language. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Mandated as Per Part 154. I.S. 291 instructional model ensures that all the mandated number of instructional minutes are provided according to proficiency levels in Transitional Bilingual and English as a New Language. Teachers that teach Transitional Bilingual students in the content area are speakers of the students' first language. This result in the use of a content area vocabulary 2018-19 RSCEP-R 107  development, preview/review methodologies, scaffold, literacy activities in the content area or Native Language Arts instruction in subjects such as Mathematics, Science and Social Studies. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All curriculum and instruction are designed for the 6th, 7th and 8th graders in alignment with the NYS Common Core Standards. I.S. 291 ENL and Transitional Bilingual services are organized to reflect current research and best practices. We currently have two ESL teachers, One Common Branch Bilingual Teacher, two content area teachers, Social Studies and Math. All ELLs receive instruction from fully certified teachers. The certified ENL/ESL teachers use the Pull-Out, Push-In Model to service the students. Students are grouped homogeneously based on the skills needed to develop academic language as measured by the LAB-R, NYSESLAT, and informal tools such as teacher's assessments, class work and students folders. All material are age and grade appropriate. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We use the following computer based program to augment instruction Imagine Learning for ELA . The lessons are leveled according to the students' proficiency level. Imagine Learning which is a math program is also available. Students are scheduled to receive interventions at least twice a week. Students also receive Academic Intervention in their vernacular language. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). The Parent Coordinator provides informational workshops to keep the parents and students inform on all aspects of the students' educational needs. The following is an example of workshops provided ar I.S. 291. Shifting into Gear, a parent guide to the Common Core Instructional Shifts, The Guidance Counselor provides a Meet and Greet opportunity and conducts the following workshop for the parent: Helping your Child Succeed in School/Improving/Study Skills, Internet Safety, English as a Second language, how can I assist my child to succeed. Teachers and Guidance Counselor meet with students on a regular basis to inform the students on their progress and most importantly, areas they need to improve in order to be successful in their classes. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? At the present moment we dont't offer electives to the ELLs. We will, however, if budget permits exposed the ELLs to a Romance Language such as Italian, Portugese and French. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? I.S. 291 Professional Development Program is designed to enhance teachers knowledge by additionally providing on-site professional development to all ENL/ESL/Bilingual and content area teachers receive Professional Development during their common preparation time, after school and during teachers extended time. Teachers are also encouraged to attend 2018-19 RSCEP-R 108  professional development off site. The professional development is designed to assist all teachers to plan and deliver their lesson to optimize learning and assessment outcomes. The following professional development sessions are offered: Effective Collaboration in the ELL Classroom, Curriculum Writing and Analyzing Student's Work. I.S. 291 Professional Development is designed to enhance teachers knowledge by additionally providing on-site professional development to ENL/ENL and Bilingual teachers. Additionally, we provide on-site Professional Development during their common preparation time and during teachers; extended time as well as mandated professional development during Chancellor's Conference Day. Professional development is designed to assist all teachers to plan and deliver their lesson to optimize learning and assessment outcome. The following professional development sessions are offered: 1. Imagine Learning/I-Ready Training September 2. Introduction to Language Allocation Policy-September/October 2. CR- Part 154-November 4. Infusing ENL strategies across Content Area-December 5. Test Sophistication-Strategies to prepare students to meet city and state ENL Standards-January 6. Language Progression and its Implications on ENL and English Language Learners-February 5. NYSESLAT Training-March 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The Guidance Counselor in addition provides the students with counselling sessions in which they are informed of the demands they will face as they transition from middle school to high school. Furthermore, the Guidance Counselor provides professional development that will help the teachers understand and help the students have a smooth transition to High School. At I.S. 291, Professional Development Program is designed to enhance teachers knowledge by additionally providing ongoing on-site professional development to all ENL/Bilingual teachers and Content Area Teachers as per CR Part 80. Professional development is given during their common preparation time, after school and extended time. Professional Development is designed to assist all teachers in planning and delivering their lesson to optimize learning and assessment outcome. The following professional development is given during their common preparation time ( first or eight period):. Effective Collaboration in the ELL Classroom, Tiering and Lesson Planning, Engaging Students in Learning-Enhancing Professional Practice- IEP Lesson Planning. IEP Matrix/ Implementing Individualized Goals in Inclusive Classroom-and Building Deeper Understanding of the Eight Components. I.S. 291 also provide professional development services in accordance with CR Part 80. The following is a projected format for staff development-Infusing ENL Strategies across all Content Area, Common Core Instructional Shifts and implications for ELLs, Integrating Language and Content, Test Sophistication,-Strategies to prepare students to meet city, state, and ESL Standards, The Language Progression and its Implications on ENL and ELLs. Teachers will gain a deeper understanding on the above information as well as the implementation of the strategies in their classroom to prepare students to meet city, state and ESL Standards. All teachers will attend the following Monday PDs for ELLs for an 1 hour and 15 minutes which covers the 15% ELL - specific professional development for all teachers: 1. Infusing ENL strategies across Content Area-January 2. Test Sophistication-Strategies to prepare students to meet city and state ENL Standards-February 3. Language Progression and its Implications on ENL and English Language Learners-February 4. NYSESLAT Training-March 2018-19 RSCEP-R 109  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? I.S. 291 schedule meetings to keep the parents informed in all aspects of their children education throughout the school year. We also encourage parents to participate in their children's learning. We invite the parents to our school to meet with their children's teachers of all content areas to obtain all information regarding their children's performance. Parents that are non-English speakers and need translation services, can get the information from the teachers that speak Spanish. For the parents that speak a language not available in our school, we contact the Translation Unit Services to assist us in translating the information. During the month of October, our Bilingual teachers will host class parental meetings on Tuesdays to discuss the goals of the bilingual program by grade level. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The parents are invited to various activities throughout the year. For example: The Parent Coordinator conducts the following activities: Workshop, Breakfast on Saturday, once a month. We also take parents on trips for example to see plays, distribute tickets to attend their children College Basketball Game in Madison Square Garden, Museums. Students participation in school activities Ceremonies for Perfect Attendance, every trimester we acknowledge the students' academic performance and recognition of their academic performance through assemblies. Thanksgiving Feast to involve parents and students in their learning and recreation activities as well as to learn and understand the meaning of Thanksgiving. We will also offer the following parent workshops: DASA Training, ESL Workshops for parents, IEP Binder Party, Understanding the NYS/NYC Testing Program, Dealing with Anxiety, Helping your ELL Child Learn English. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2018-19 RSCEP-R 110 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Janice Bruce, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 111  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Roland Hayes School DBN: 291K Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Janice Bruce Title Principal Madeline Rodriguez Assistant Principal Francisco Gonzalez Parent Coordinator Anthony Pruett ENL/Bilingual Teacher TBD Parent Carmen Pena Teacher/Subject Area Nancy Palomino Teacher/Subject Area Pamela Pabon Catherine Rhee Coach Coach Miguelina Urena School Counselor Sheila Gorski Tatyana Ulubabova Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member TBD TBD TBD TBD Other NA Other NA Other NA Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 RSCEP-R 112  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 32K291 School Name: Roland Hayes Superintendent: Sheila Gorski The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) Fransisco Gonzalez Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Survey I.S. 291 uses data from the Home Language Survey completed by parents upon registration. Based on the information given by the parents on Part 3 of the Home Language Survey and parents preference language of communication, all oral and written communication material are sent to the parents in their preferred language of communication. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 113  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish English Haitian Creole Arabic 255 197 3 1 55.8 43.11 0.66 0.22 261 190 3 2 57.11 41.58 0.66 044 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. None Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The following are documents we disseminate to parents throughout the year: special events taking place at the school, such as Carnival, information on the after-school program, PTA Meetings, School Leadership Meetings, School and Parent Coordinator workshops, school expectations, and Award Ceremonies. Dissemination of opening day announcements, Student Handbook, Summer School information, and End of the year letters. Parent and Teacher Conferences, Meet and Greet, announcements and reminders. NYS Testing dates Calendar and letters. 4 times a year School Data Reports 2-3 times a year Monthly basis Parent Coordinator translates to Spanish. All communication is sent to the parents in the language spoken at home. at the beginning/end of the year Parent Coordinator translates to Spanish. Parent Coordinator translates to Spanish. Parent Coordinator translates to Spanish. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 114  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings The following are formal and informal face to face interactions with parents: Parent-Teacher Conference Dates: September 20, 2018, November 27, 2018 March 26, 2019 May 16, 2019 Outreach Community Events, Parents Workshops , PTA events and Award Ceremonies These interactions are good vehicle to keep parents abreast of all information they must obtain. All school and DOE calendars are distributed in September with monthly reminders on calendar and monthly parent notices. Parent Association and School Leadership Team Meetings Monthly How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Utilize staff members Teachers use over the phone translation services. Parent Coordinator or other staff member. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We use Kinvolved which is a text-based application that allows the school to send mass text messages to families regarding school functions and events in Spanish or other languages. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 115  Staff e-mail and memo are sent out in September and reminders prior to parent conferences. Attachments include Chancellor's Regulation A-663, Language identification Guide, Translation and Interpretation Request Forms, Over the phone services, Translation and Interpretation Unit. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) In September our parents receive a notice of Chancellor's Regulations A663 that there are Spanish speaking interpreters available daily at the school, parent meeting and workshops. Office of Language and Interpretation Services arrangements can be made for over the phone or in person interpretation services in other languages or sign language. I Speak and Free Interpretation cards are posted throughout the building, classrooms and offices. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The goal of I.S. 291 is to communicate with non-English speaking parents. The following are methods that I.S. 291 will implement at I.S. 291 to gather information from parents: During Parent-Teacher Conference, teachers will receive feedback from parents in their vernacular language. We will also mail and or back pack surveys in which the parents will fill out and return to the teacher. We will review the information and implement any changes or observations made by the parents. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 116 
