2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP-CS) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 22K315 School Name: P.S. K315 Principal: JUDITH RANFT 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information PS K315 33220010315 Pre-K through 5 School Number (DBN): 22K315 2310 Glenwood Road Brooklyn, N.Y., 11210 718 421-9560 Phone Number: 718 421-9561 Fax: Judith Ranft-Quartana jranft@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Judith Ranft-Quartana Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Raquel Sanon Alicia Knight Parents’ Association President: Raquel Hairston-Sanon; Edith DeMaio SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Title 1 Representative MechelleDowell The Leadership Program- 21st Century-Erin Finley CBO Representative: Geographical District: 22 District Information Julia Bove Superintendent: 5609 Flatlands Avenue Brooklyn, NY, 11234 Superintendent’s Office Address: jbove@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 968-6100 Phone Number: 718-968-6252 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Brooklyn South MauriciereDeGovia FSC: Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 415 89 th Street Brooklyn, NY, 11209 MDegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718 759-4862 Phone Number: 718-240-3677 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Judith Ranft-Quartana Raquel Sanon Alicia Knight Christine Dennis Erin Finley WilmaGeorge MechelleDowell Zach Notes Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable /Member/Parent Member/Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Joy Finerson FinaAlomari TarynTaylor Raquel HairstonSanon; Edith DeMaio Doreen Fandacone Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ UFT Member/ Chairperson Member/ UFT Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of PS 315K is to promote a safe and respectful learning environment where students are educated to be college and career ready through a Professional Learning Community where all members are stakeholders and work toward the common goal of having students ready to meet the challenges of an ever changing technological 21 st century society. Students will develop through an academically rigorous curriculum fostering important decision making, critical thinking, and technological skills enhanced through the fine arts and fostering the ability to communicate effectively. All members of the school community will share accountability for creating a positive,   supportive, nurturing, and respectful environment, and for achieving successful student outcomes through high quality standards driven instruction where the arts are celebrated and diversity embraced. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS 315K is an ethnically diverse elementary school with 657 students from prekindergarten through grade 5. The school population comprises 56.18%African -American, 27. 07% Hispanic , 6.40% Caucasian, 7.71 % Asian and 2.61% other students. The student population consists of 16.25% English Language Learners and approximately 27% Special Education students. Boys account for 50.94%of the student population while girls comprise 49.05%. PS 315K partners with Flatbush Development Corporation (FDC) and the 21st Century Leadership Program which supports working parents by providing an after school program which includes homework help ,recreational an enrichment activities. We also partner with Brooklyn College in support of their teacher preparation program. PS 315K has welcomed student teachers and student observers into our classrooms to provide internships with experienced teachers. PS 315K has partner with the Reading Partners which provides individualized tutoring to struggling readers. PS 315K welcomes the arts into our school by partnering with arts residencies such as Dancing Classrooms, Music for Many, Making Books Sing, New York City Ballet, and Link Up With Carnegie Hall. We also have certified art and dance teachers to provide quality arts instruction to our students. The element of trust ensures that the teachers will successfully embrace all components of the Framework for Great Schools. It is the thread that ties the framework together within the PS 315 K Learning Community. We will continue to refine and build upon our key areas of focus which include rigorous instruction, strong family and community ties, supportive environment, collaborative teachers, and effective school leadership all embracing the needs of our culturally and linguistically diverse students and families. These will be outlined in detail within the different action plans. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our two biggest subgroups are the English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities. Both populations need extra support with the literacy and math curricula that are driven by the Common Core Learning Standards. Academic challenges exist in the areas of oral language development, phonemic awareness and phonics, writing, reading, and reading comprehension. Problem solving in math presents problems for these subgroups as reading, writing and speaking to express mathematical reasoning are involved. While language presents a challenge for the ENL students, academic challenges come into play for the Students With Disabilities. Social and emotional factors present challenges for all students as internal controls sometimes inhibit a student from the optimal learning experience. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The elements from the Framework for Great Schools that we have made progress include the following: ● Rigorous Instruction is an area that has been an identified need as determined by our most recent Quality Review, the Principals’ Performance Review, teacher observations and snapshots centered on Danielson’s Framework for Effective Teaching. When visiting a classroom, effective discussion can be seen with higher order questions being asked to engage students intellectually. Students work cooperatively on different tasks assigned by the teacher and students share their collaborative work with the rest of the class. Common Core aligned curriculum in ELA and Math took the form of the Journeys Common Core Literacy and Go Math Programs. Teachers have made progress on 0  question formation aligned to Webb’s Depth of Knowledge. and the integration of the Socratic Seminar and Gallery Walks in both literacy and math based discussions. Performance tasks in ELA and Math are rubric based and connected to the Common Core Learning Standards in ELA and Math which were completed by the students. The integration of the Exemplars Math Performance Tasks has contributed to students being successful in the productive struggle that accompanies rigorous math problem solving. Student interaction and peer led discussions is also an area where pedagogy has shown improvement. Teachers have made progress in maintaining ongoing checks for understanding throughout a lesson. ● Supportive Environment: This is an area where PS 315K continues to show growth. A culture of respect and rapport is established in the different classrooms where students work collaboratively and support each other academically and in the social emotional areas as well. Accountable talk is evidenced in partner share and small group activities. Students reflect upon the work of their peers. Feedback is provided by both students and staff to provide glows, grows, and next steps. The whole child is celebrated through the Leader in Me Program, a program that embraces leadership qualities in every child and is based on the seven habits of highly effective people or happy kids. We also have the Star Student which emphasizes safety and a respect for all environment. We have a student and citizen of the month from every class in the school. Students and staff are supported by a full time guidance counselor, social worker, and our SBST team. The Sanford Harmony Curriculum will continue to be implemented with a designated time frame allotted each day for conflict resolution. ● Collaborative Teachers: PS 315K has made progress in this areas as teachers work in grade cohorts to plan collaboratively and look at student work. Teacher teams are horizontal on grade levels, vertical across grade levels, are made up of sub groups such as Students with Disabilities, English Language Learners, or Enrichment classes. Teachers collaborate on instructional trends, implications for instruction, and next steps toward meeting student achievement. Teacher committees are created to address the specific interests and needs of the school. These committees the Discipline Committee, School Wellness Committee, Professional Development Committee, Parent Involvement Committee, Leader In Me Lighthouse Committee, and Enrichment Committees. Teacher Ambassadors are instrumental in turn keying instructional initiatives that are district-wide. PS 315K is part of the Continuous Learning Initiative which focuses on moving the proficiency of ENL students through the venue of small change. Using the improvement science philosophy, a cohort of teachers and administrators has been established to implement these small changes and reflect upon the impact of these changes. ● Strong family and community ties are an area of focus for PS 315K. Parent involvement is minimal and needs to be improved upon.We will be looking at this component carefully and working to build parent capacity. We will continue to implement a weekly Open Access time designated for parents to visit their children's classrooms to observe lessons and participate in class activities. We also will continue with our Breakfast With the Principal and Assistant Principal on a monthly basis which includes a parent workshop and a networking forum for parents. Our 21st Century Grant After School Program has a parent component which will provide additional parent workshops and different celebrations geared toward the arts. ● Effective school leadership: Administration at PS 315K is working at building teacher capacity. Grade leaders have been established as grade level facilitators to ensure school wide protocols and instructional expectations are implemented on the different grade levels. Teacher have begun to facilitate weekly PD sessions on topics relevant to the teachers’ needs and share best practices. Intervisitations and fishbowl lessons will continue to be implemented to support teacher practice. Lab classrooms will set up utilizing the expertise of highly effective personnel. A Peer Collaborative Teacher has been established to facilitate best practices through the intervisitation process and in class modeling. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 22K315 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 677 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 57 59 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 41 32 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 89.0% % Attendance Rate 84.6% % Reduced Lunch 16.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.3% 27.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 5.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7.47 0% 9% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 38.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 81% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 71 72 93.5% 3.4% 25.4% 55.8% 8.6% 1.9% 2 0% 7.2 35.9% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A NO YES NO N/A N/A NO NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Regarding rigorous instruction and supportive environment, data from teacher observations and snapshots from 2017-18, the Quality Review from 2017-18, The Principal’s Performance Observation, from 2017-18, all yield the need to further refine instruction to be academically rigorous and challenging for all groups of students. Although much progress had been made in this area, we need to continue monitoring and revising our instructional plans to include more intellectually engaging instructional activities. 1. As a result of our needs assessment, the following areas are areas of strength:  The Socratic Seminar and Gallery Walk protocols are tools for student led discussion that is a strength in some of our classrooms and are utilized as a model for best practices as they enhance student engagement through peer discussion, collaboration, joint problem solving, assessment and reflection.  .The instructional protocol of Thinking Routine strategies has been implemented this year and has been instrumental in providing all learners a venue from which discussion can be generated. 2. As a result of our needs assessment the following are our priority needs that will be addressed in the goal and action plan:  Continued refinement of Danielson 3B, effective questioning and discussion techniques. Continued refinement of Danielson 3C, student engagement. The data from Advance yielded a 31 percentage rate of teachers in the developing category.  Refinement of Danielson 3D, student assessment. The data from Advance yields a 20 percentage rate in teachers at the developing level. Authentic teacher and student feedback, rubric design both teacher and 3 student generated, ongoing checks for understanding through checklists outlining the success criteria for students' achieving mastery are all areas of refinement for the teachers. Teachers will focus on writing clear learning objectives supported by actionable success criteria which will allow for ongoing checks for understanding by both teachers and students. Student assessment will be refined for capturing and distributing data to help inform teacher practice.  Meeting the academic needs of the level 4 student - project based learning and the movement away from workbooks will allow for more rigorous, authentic performance tasks to be generated as well as differentiation based on both academic needs and interests of the students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Beginning in September 2018, and ending in June 2019, the students in PS 315K will demonstrate a 5% growth in ELA as demonstrated by the Teachers' College Reading and Writing Project benchmark running records. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Grade 2 Continued formulation of a grade 2 after school intervention program that targets level 1 and 2 readers providing foundational skills to increase movement toward grade level proficiency every Wednesday and Thursday from 2:30-4:30. Continued Brooklyn College partnership which will provide reading tutors and in class support through the student teacher program. Continued implementation of the Journeys Common Core Reading Program which will support a strong Guided Reading component, as well as foundational skills. Implementation of a research based phonics program to provide beginning and emergent readers with explicit instruction to word attack skills with the self contained second grade class. Continued use of RAZ Kids and Reading A to Z, an online differentiated approach to leveled reading with an added ELL component.. Small group pull out instruction with the Literacy /RTI Support Teacher. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Principal, Assistant Principal, Literacy and Math Support Teacher, Classroom Teachers , Data Specialist, IEP Teacher, Library Teacher will be stakeholders in all parts of the action plan. Grade 2 level 1 and 2 students The time line is from September 5,2018 through June 26, 2019 on Wednesday and Thursday Monday through Friday in all aspects unless specified differently. November 14, 2018, through May 23, 2019, Wednesday and Thursday. The time line is from September 5,2018 through June 26, 2019 on 5  Increased Guided and Independent Reading time. Continued implementation of a daily intervention block to target high level one and low level two students in both ELA and Math. Implementation of Reading Plus in second grade to improve reading stamina and comprehension skills. ELL Continued formulation of a Title III Saturday intervention program that targets entering and expanding ELL students providing foundational skills to increase movement toward grade level proficiency. Implementation Reading Rescue to provide one on one tutoring to level 1 and 2 students. Continued Brooklyn College partnership which will provide reading tutors and in class support through the student teacher program. Continued implementation of the Journeys Common Core Reading Program which will support a strong Guided Reading component, as well as foundational skills. Participation in the Continuous Learning initiative which will highlight effective classroom strategies geared to support language acquisition in ELL students. Wednesday and Thursday Principal, Assistant Principal, Literacy and Math Support Teacher, Classroom Teachers, Library Teacher, Data Specialist, ENL Coordinator, ENL Support Teacher are stakeholders in all parts of the action plan. in all parts of the ELL action plan. Beginning and Intermediate ELLS The time line is from November 8, 2018 through May 25, 2019. The program runs daily. Partnership runs daily. Program runs daily. The program runs two or 6  Continued use of RAZ Kids and Reading A to Z, an online differentiated approach to leveled reading. Continued utilization of the Reading Plus Program to increase reading stamina and comprehension. Small group push in instruction with the ELL Coordinator and Support Teacher. Implementation of a daily intervention block to target high level one and low level two students. Utilize Math Support Teacher to provide small group intervention to high level one and low level two students. After school test prep program in both ELA and Math on Wednesday and Thursday afternoons from 2:30-4:00. three times a week. (Days vary) Program is used daily. Program runs daily. Program is used two times a week. Program runs daily. Program runs daily. Intervention block is daily. Math Intervention is daily. The program is conducted 7 Principal, Assistant Principal, Literacy and Classroom Teacher, Library Teacher, Data Specialist, IEP Teacher, Math Support Teacher are the stakeholders for all activities to support the Students with Disabilities. Students With Disabilities The implementation of the Fundations Phonics Program to provide a foundational knowledge of letter sounds. SWD Continued Brooklyn College partnership which will provide reading tutors and in class support through the student teacher program. Continued implementation of the Journeys Common Core Reading Program which will support a strong Guided Reading component, and Fundations Phonics Program. Continued use of RAZ Kids and reading A to Z, an online differentiated approach to leveled reading Small group pull out instruction with the SETSS and IEP teacher utilizing Orton Gillingham Multisensory instruction and the Spire Program. Flexible programming to accommodate students’ specific academic needs and learning styles. Utilize Math Support teacher to provide small group intervention to high level two students. After school test prep program in both ELA and Math on Wednesday and Thursday afternoons from 2:30-4:00. Wednesday and Thursday afternoons from 2:30-4:00. 30 minutes from Monday through Friday. Partnership runs daily. from Oct. 1, 2018 through May 1, 2019. Program runs daily. Program runs daily. Program runs daily. Program runs daily. Program runs daily. 8  Continued utilization of the Reading Plus Program to increase reading stamina and comprehension. Continued implementation of the CS4ALL to foster computer literacy, problem solving and analytical thinking from PreKindergarten through grade 5. Enrichment Level 3 and 4 students Implementation of project based learning activities to facilitate more rigorous instruction. Continued implementation of Teacher Teams focused on rigorous instruction to enhance the above level learner. Continued implementation of the Journeys Common Core Reading Program and Fundations Phonics Program which will support a strong Guided Reading component, as well as foundational skills. Program runs every Wed. and Thurs. from Nov.14, 2018 through May 23, 2019. Program runs twice a week. CS4ALL is once or twice a week in participating teachers' classrooms. The time line is from Sept 5. ,2018 through June 26, 2019 Teacher Teams meet twice a month. Program is conducted daily. Principal, Assistant Principal, Literacy and Math Support Teacher, Classroom Teacher, Library Teacher, Data Specialist, IEP Teacher are stakeholders involved in all parts of the action plan. 9 Continued use of RAZ Kids and reading A to Z, an online differentiated approach to leveled reading. Specialized programming to accommodate students’ specific academic needs and learning styles. Program is conducted daily. Specialized programming is conducted daily for designated students. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be engaged in the understanding of rigorous instruction through ongoing academic workshops beginning with "Meet the Teacher Night" in September of 2018 as well as the monthly Breakfast with the Principal and Assistant Principal. Parent Workshops will include "Understanding the Common Core Learning Standards in ELA and Math", "State Testing" workshops, "Understanding Your Child's IEP", "Ways to Support Language Acquisition for the ENL Student". We will utilize the Tuesday Parent Engagement time as well as "Open Access" Thursdays where parents can visit their child's classroom to view instruction and "walk in their child's footsteps" regarding the activities their children do in the classroom. The time line will be from Sept 5., 2018 through June 26 2019. Responsible staff include Principal, Assistant Principal, Values Education Teacher, Classroom and Cluster Teachers , Paraprofessionals. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Principal, Assistant Principal, Literacy Support Teacher, Math Support Teacher, ELL Coordinator, SETSS Teacher, IEP Teacher, RTI Teacher, Classroom Teachers , Speech Teachers, Data Specialist, STEM Teacher Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X X C4E X 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 0  Progress monitoring will take place in November, February, and June with February being the midpoint. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) In Literacy,progress monitoring will be done in November, February, and June utilizing the Journeys Common Core end of unit assessments, performance tasks and Teachers College benchmarks In Math, progress monitoring is done utilizing the Go Math end of chapter assessments , as well as the beginning, mid, and end of year assessments and Exemplars performance tasks. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1.The strengths of our PBIS Program are as follows:  Behavioral Matrix aligned to the Star Student initiative which outlines behavioral expectations in all aspects of the community and throughout the school day.  Continued implementation of the Playworks Program which supports teamwork and cooperation skills and a safe recess environment.  The Student of the Month and Honor Roll are initiatives that promote a college and career ready attitude toward learning and a positive self esteem. Lunchroom Commendation Cards have been re-established as a incentive for positive behavioral outcomes.   VIP certificates/students who exhibit a respect for all attitude. 2. Priority Needs: Pertaining to supportive environment and effective school leadership,data from teacher surveys and OORS indicate a need for a more streamlined Positive Behavior Intervention Plan which would outline specific behavioral incentives as well as a more cohesive discipline approach. 3. We will be implementing a Discipline Committee to address the above mentioned Priority Needs and provide teacher input into the PBIS process. See also the above practices. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Beginning in September 5, 2018 and ending in June 26, 2019, 80% of the staff will have gained an increased awareness of diversity and cultural inclusiveness as a result of the participation in the New York State Integration Project where the needs of our culturally and linguistically diverse students and families will be addressed. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Principal, Assistant Principal, Lunchroom Coordinator teacher, Guidance Counselor, Social Worker Classroom Teachers, Cluster teachers, Paraprofessionals Data Specialist, IEP Teacher are the stakeholders responsible for this goal.  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Participation in the New York State Integration Project to promote cultural and linguistic awareness among all stakeholders. Implementation of a lunchroom coordinator and a Values Education Teacher. Continued implementation of a full time Guidance Counselor to facilitate a social and emotional response to at risk behaviors. Continued implementation of the STAR Student PBIS plan utilized throughout the school highlighting “”Supporting Safety”; Always Doing Your Best”, Taking Responsibility”; and “Respecting Yourself and Others”. Continued implementation of a monthly STAR Student who embodies the mission of the PBIS School Wide Behavior Plan. Continued implementation of the PBIS Behavior Matrix highlighting “Star Student” behavior in all aspects of the school day. All students Kindergarten through grade 5 The time line for implementation is Sept ,.2018 through June 26, 2019 in all aspects unless specified. 3  Continued implementation of a monthly “Star Student” assembly and “Superstar Social”. Star students get to celebrate their “Star Student” status by having a celebration of their choice, such as an ice cream party. The continued implementation of the Leader in Me philosophy which has a leadership focus and speaks to high expectations centering on the Seven Habits of H8appy Kids. Continued implementation of Student Greeters and Student Ambassadors that represent the voice of the students. Continued implementation of the Leader in Me “Lighthouse Team” which sets the course of activities related to staff understanding of cultural and linguistic diversity. Professional Development geared toward diverse student cultures, languages and learning styles to facilitate instruction that is meaningful and relevant to students' lives. The continued implementation of the Student Government to foster student voice throughout the school. Continued implementation of Restorative Justice approach to discipline through a common Sanford Harmony time. Implementation of a Discipline Committee that will be comprised of teachers on all grade levels and will meet monthly on different behavioral issues that may arise. Implementation of School Spirit Fridays to foster community among all constituencies within the school community. The Star Student Assembly occurs monthly. The Leader In Me Program is utilized monthly. This initiative will begin in December 2018. This will occur during monthly meetings. 4  Continued implementation of Playworks to foster teamwork and cooperation during lunch time recess. This will occur during monthly meetings. This will occur during monthly meetings. This will occur on designated Fridays. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Pertaining to strong family and community ties, families will be engaged in the understanding of the PS 315K PBIS plan through ongoing workshops beginning with the "Meet the Teacher Night" in September of 2018 as well as the monthly Breakfast with the Principal and Assistant Principal. The time line will be from Sept.5, 2018 through June 26, 2019. Responsible staff include Principal, Assistant Principal, Values Education Teacher, Guidance Counselor, Social Worker, Classroom Teachers , Paraprofessionals, School Aides, Lighthouse Committee. Parent Workshops will include "Understanding PBIS", "Creating a Behavior Matrix to Use at Home", Parenting Skills, etc., "The Seven Habits of Happy Kids". Pertaining to collaborative teachers, there will be monthly inquiry sessions both vertical and horizontal, common planning, and grade level professional development. Pertaining to supportive environment and trust, we have implemented intervisitations, teacher mentors, coaching suppport staff, feedback sessions, individualized professional development and outside consultants. 5  The 21st Century Leadership Program provides parent workshops centering on parenting skills and community resources with an emphasis on the whole child. The Guidance Counselor and Social Worker meet with parents on an as needed basis for designated students that are exhibiting social/emotional issues. Pertaining to effective school leadership, distributive leadership is evidenced through grade leaders, teacher inquiry facilitators, teacher mentors, coaches and support staff, instructional cabinet, SIT Team, PPC Team, Data Review Team, Teacher Ambassadors, and the Language Proficiency Team. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will utilize the Principal, Assistant Principal, Values Education Teacher, Guidance Counselor, Social Worker,SBST , Classroom Teachers, Lighthouse Team, Discipline Committee, Data Specialist, Classroom Teachers, Paraprofessionals. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress monitoring will occur in November,2018, February and May of 2019 with February being the midpoint benchmark. We will be looking at OORS data as well as teacher and parent feedback. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress monitoring for this goal will take place in November, February, and June as determined by the reduced number of incidents and occurrences reported in the monthly data report generated through OORS. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. The school’s strength with regard to this framework are outlined below. According to the 2017-18 School Quality Snapshot, 77% of those surveyed responded positively to questions about supportive environment. Some of our strengths include our PBIS Star Student Initiative, our Values Education Teacher, Guidance Counselor and Social Worker. We provide a risk free environment where students feel secure about expressing their feelings and concerns. Student voice is heard through our Student Government. Through our 21st Century Grant, we have a Girls Group and a Boys Group. We have partnered with the Men Teach Program so several of our teachers are involved with mentoring young men who serve as role models for our male students. We also have a Leadership After School Club with this program which focuses ion building self esteem in an inclusive environment. 2. The priority needs that will be addressed in the goal and action plan are outlined below. Pertaining to collaborative teachers, effective school leadership, supportive environment and trust, data from teacher observations and snapshots, refinement is needed in the areas of Danielson 3b,3C, and 3D. This is the instructional piece which speaks to planning and preparation and the delivery of a coherently designed lessons that includes differentiation for groups and individual students. Universal Design for Learning is an area that needs further refinement. Planning and preparation collaboratively to drive instruction and looking at student work to pin point individual students’ strengths and challenges is an area of focus for the PS 315K Learning Community. Teachers of Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners need to refine their instruction to align more with their students' Individualized Educational Plan goals and students' individual management needs. The following elements will be emphasized in Teacher Inquiry meetings: ● Collaborative planning and preparation yielding coherently designed lessons targeting students’ strength and challenges and differentiation according to these needs. ● Looking at multiple entry points to better meet the individual needs of the students. ● Sharing best practices to target these needs through the development of action plans aimed at monitoring student progress and revising where necessary. ● Vertical teacher inquiry to see the coherency of instruction across grade levels. ● Sub group teacher inquiry to address the unique concerns of these groups of students, such as English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities. 7  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Beginning September 5, 2018 and ending in June 26, 2019, 50% of all teachers will have participated in cycles of individualized Professional Development, collaborative planning, and Teacher Inquiry on both a vertical, horizontal, and subgroup level as evidenced by weekly meeting attendance sheets and agendas, including participation in Teacher Ambassador District wide meetings and turn key sessions as evidenced through Advance data reflecting teacher snapshots and observations resulting in a 5% increase in teachers receiving an overall effective rating. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Grade Level Teacher Inquiry All Teachers and Sept. 5,2018 Grade level teams and Arts Inquiry Team will meet weekly to discuss student work,plan collaboratively, analyze data, share best practices, and discuss trends across the grade. Paras through June 23, 2019. These teams will meet twice a month. Vertical Inquiry Teams All teachers and para- Sept. 5 2018 Vertical teams across grade levels will meet monthly to discuss curriculum planning, instructional strategies, IEP’s, and ELL supports. professionals Students with Disabilities  Enrichment   ELL’s (Continuous Learning)   Grade Leaders  Vertical Inquiry Teams will meet every six weeks. Integrated Co Teaching Teams through June 26, 2019 These teams will meet monthly. Principal, Assistant Principal, Lunchroom Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, Classroom Teachers, Social Worker Paraprofessionals, Data Specialist, IEP Teacher, Math and Literacy Support Teacher are all stakeholders in this action plan. Principal, Assistant Principal, Lunchroom Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, Classroom Teachers, Social Worker, Paraprofessionals, Data Specialist, IEP Teacher, Math and Literacy Teachers Continuous Learning Team will meet weekly on Wednesday's and biweekly after school to address the language and academic needs of ENL learners through the Improvement Science methodology. 6 classroom teachers on all grade levels with a predominance Sept. 5, 2018 through June 26, 2019. Princial, Assistant Principal, Classroom Teachers,Paraprofessionals, Data Specialist, four fellows which include two general 9 Peer Collaborative Teacher Universal Literacy Coach Instructional Coach RTI Teacher of ENL students.. education and two ENL teachers . Teachers in need of additional instructional support. Sept. 5, 2018 through June 26, 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Classroom Teachers, Data Specialist. in addition to Peer Collaborative Teacher, Universal Literacy Coach, Instructional Coach, and RTI Teacher. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be engaged in the understanding of the PS 315K Professional Development Plan through ongoing workshops beginning with the "Meet the Teacher Night" on September 17, 2018 as well as the monthly Breakfast with the Principal and Assistant Principal.The time line will be from Sept.5, 2018 through June 26, 2019. Responsible staff include Principal, Assistant Principal, Values Education Teacher, Guidance Counselor, Social Worker, Classroom Teachers , Paraprofessionals, School Aides, Lighthouse Committee, Continuous Learning Fellows and Parent Engagement Committee. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources leveraged to support this goal include pedagogical staff, Principal and Assistant Principal, ENL Coordinator, IEP Teacher, Instructional Coach, Data Specialist, STEM Teacher. Pedagogical staff will be utilized to instruct extended day and Saturday Programs and also provide parent workshops.The ELL staff will teach the Saturday Title III Program utilizing Title III Funding. Twenty first century funding will be used to fund our Level II Program and materials. The 21st Century Funding will be also utilized to fund a Kindergarten and Grade 1 program. School Wide Projects funding also allows for Arts' residencies within the school day to take place. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress monitoring will occur in October,2018, February and May of 2019 with February being the midpoint benchmark. 0  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teachers College Interim Running record will be the instrument of measure as a midpoint benchmark. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. In looking at the data resulting from the needs assessment, the following strengths are outlined below.  We have made progress in this area as teachers are beginning to formulate their own Inquiry Agenda, take ownership of some of the PD sessions, and open their classrooms for intervisitations.  Teacher Ambassadors are sharing the information from district wide PD sessions during the Monday Professional Learning time. 2. The following area reflect a priority focus resulting from the needs assessment of this framework element.Teacher voice within the PS 315 Learning Community will be strengthened through the establishment of Teacher Committees. These include:  Paraprofessional Inquiry Team  Arts' Inquiry Team  Grade Level Teams  Vertical Teams   PD Committee  Discipline Committee  Parent Engagement Committee    ELL / Continuous Learning Teacher Inquiry Team   Continuous Learning Fellows Inquiry Team facilitators Lighthouse Leader In Me team SWD Teacher Inquiry Team ICT Teacher Inquiry Team Data sources will include the School Quality Snapshot, NYSED School Report Card, New York City School Survey, Quality Review, data from the Principal's Performance Review. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Beginning September 5, 2018 and ending in June 26, 2019, 75% of the teachers will be able to write and articulate clear learning objectives to formulate "on the spot" assessment practices to ensure that students are aware of the learning target and can self monitor progress toward mastery. 3 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will participate in school wide professional development geared toward the concept of learning objectives and the resulting success criteria that is needed in order for students to achieve mastery. Teachers will participate in common planning sessions focused on formulating clear and concise learning objectives that result in formative assessments aligned to these objectives. Teachers and Paras Sept. 5, 2018 through June, 26, 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Literacy Support Teacher, Math Support Teacher, RTI Teacher, IEP Teacher, SETSS Teacher, ENL Coordinator, Classroom and Cluster Teachers Principal, Assistant Principal, Literacy Support Teacher, Math Support Teacher, RTI Teacher, IEP Teacher, SETSS Teacher, ENL Coordinator, Classroom and Cluster Teachers Principal, Assistant Principal, Literacy Support Teacher, Math Support Teacher, RTI Teacher, IEP Teacher, SETSS Teacher, ENL Coordinator, Classroom and Cluster Teachers Principal, Assistant Principal, Literacy Support Teacher, Math Support Designated teachers will be part of the district teacher Ambassador Program and turnkey new pedagogical practices to the PS 315K Learning Community. Teachers and Paras Sept. 5, 2018 through June 26 ,2019 ENL Support Staff, IEP Teacher, Literacy Coach ,Math Support staff, and school mentors will provide in class Professional Development to new and struggling teachers. Teachers and Paras Sept. 5, 2018 through June 26, 2019 Classroom intervisitations will be used to support struggling and new teachers to view best practices. Teachers and Paras 4  The implementation of a peer collaborative teacher to support both new and experienced teachers with regard to effective pedagogy. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Sept. 5, 2018 through June 26, 2019 Teacher, RTI Teacher, IEP Teacher, SETSS Teacher, ENL Coordinator, Classroom and Cluster Teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Effective school leadership will be promoted through parent engagement by encouraging parent volunteers to be class parents. Parent Association leaders such as president, treasurer, and secretary, and School Leadership Team members will facilitate leadership development among the parent community.Parent workshops will be conducted to discuss the different roles of each of these type of parent leadership positions. Workshops conducted by both administration and the parent coordinator will be conducted to apprise parents of what these roles and responsibilities entail. Workshops around homework help, healthy eating, curriculum, and parenting will be conducted monthly. The time line for this is from September 5, 2018 through June 26, 2019. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. All pedagogical and paraprofessional staff, Principal, Assistant Principal, Instructional Coach, Guidance Counselor , Values Education Teacher, RTI Teacher, IEP Teacher, SETSS Teacher, ENL Coordinator , Data Specialist, and STEM teacher will be utilized to implement this plan. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress monitoring will take place in November, 2018, February, and June of 2019, through data resulting from Advance observations. The midpoint benchmark will occur in February. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. This goal will be measured by the number of effective teachers in the instructional components of the Danielson Framework for Effective Teaching. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. The following strengths are outlined below.  Open Access Thursdays  Parent Engagement Tuesdays  Breakfast with the Principal, Assistant Principal and Parent Coordinator. 2. Our priority focus is outlined below. Parent Involvement is an area that needs to be strengthened. Pertaining to strong family and community ties attendance data from Parent Involvement activities for the 2017-18 school year yielded parent attendance to be less than 5% of the student population. 50% of the parents surveyed from the School Leadership Team indicated a need for better and timelier communication between the school and the parent community before parent engagement activities. The following items will be our areas of focus in our action plan which will incorporate the continued implementation of Parent Involvement activities, Open Access Thursdays, Breakfast with the Principal and Assistant Principal and the implementation of online Parent Workshops through Echalk. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Beginning September 5, 2018 and ending on June 26, 2019, PS 315K will create a nurturing and supportive environment for families built on trust and mutual respect of all the constituents involved as evidenced by a 10% increase in Parent Engagement as evidenced from agendas and sign in sheets from Parent Association Meetings, and an increased amount of academic workshops, and family events and celebrations conducted throughout the school year including Open Access Thursdays. 7 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents in Pre-Kindergarten through grade 5. The time line for all the activities in the action plan will be from Sept.5, Parent Coordinator, Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers, Cluster and Classroom Teachers, Guidance Counselor, Social Worker 2018 through June 26, 2019 Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Strong family and community ties along with trust will be integrated in the following ways: Continued implementation of a Parent Engagement Committee comprised of one teacher per grade level to work with the Principal and Assistant Principal to develop a Parent Engagement calendar of activities throughout the year. “Open Access” Thursdays where parents can visit their children’s classrooms and participate in classroom activities. Implementation of “Publishing Parties” where parents can participate in a celebration of student writing. Translators will be made available for the ENL parents at all parent functions; communications will be sent to parents in all pertinent languages that reflect our student population. Parent Engagement time on Tuesday afternoons from 2:20-3:00 will be utilized to meet with parents, provide workshops, create newsletters, utilize Echalk, etc. A parent survey will be conducted to determine parent interests and needs. 8  Rigorous instruction will be integrated through: Academic workshop topics pertinent to ENLS, SWD’s and parents of bottom third students will be provided in all pertinent languages. These include Homework Help, Journeys Literacy, Go Math, The State Testing Program, and Testing Accommodations, How to Help Your Child in Reading, Pupilpath, Parent-Teacher Communications, etc., Common Core Learning Standards in Literacy and Math and the Echalk Parent Communication site will also be workshops topics. The parent coordinator, administrators, classroom and cluster teachers will all be involved in providing workshops to these parents. Workshops will be offered on Saturday, as well as during the week. Multicultural parent-child events, targeting the different ethnicities, will be implemented during the course of the school year. Reading Plus parent workshops will also be offered during the course of the year. Effective School Leadership and Supportive Environment will be integrated through the following: Continued implementation of Breakfast with the Principal, and Assistant Principal, a venue for parents to meet with the Principal and Assistant Principal to voice concerns and make suggestions as to what they would like to see in the school. Workshops will also be conducted during this time. Strong family and community ties will be integrated through the following: 9  Continued Implementation of the Echalk and Pupilpath, an online grade book to increase communication between the home and school regarding student progress. Implementation of the Class Dojo mobile application as a parent communication and information venue. Parent newsletters created by the classroom teachers to apprise the parents of what is happening in the classroom to improve the home/ school connection. Monthly calendar created by the Parent Coordinator that keeps parents abreast of important school workshops, activities, etc. Implementation of classroom parents to foster the home school connection between the classroom teacher and the parents of the students within each class. More translators available at workshops representing the different languages. Integration of the 21st Century Grant After School Parent Workshops on various topics such as Healthy Eating. Middle School transition workshops which will focus on the middle School selection process emphasizing the quality education demonstrated in the District 22 Middle Schools. The Guidance Counselor an Parent Coordinator will organize Middle School tours in District 22 Middle Schools for interested parents. 0  Middle School Principals and representatives will be invited to our Breakfast with the Principal to showcase their schools. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Community Based Organizations include Flatbush Development Corporation and the Twenty-first Century Grant which is responsible for bringing academic and arts programs from different Community Based Organizations. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. PS 315K will utilize Title 1 Parent Involvement Funds, Principal, AP, Classroom Teachers, Cluster Teachers, Data Specialist, Guidance Counselor, Social Worker and Weekly Parent Engagement Time to accomplish this goal. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019, progress monitoring will occur in which attendance from parent workshop from various events will be reviewed. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent surveys and workshop attendance data will be used as instruments of measure. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day 2X week. Spire; grade 2 Small group 1:5 Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Bottom third students ELA 2018 scores Teachers College Benchmarks Mathematics Bottom third on the 2018 Math Assessment Students identified as level 1 by classroom teachers Science Incorporated into ELA Wilson- gr. 3,4,5 Orton Gillingham: 3,4,5 Guided Reading: Grades 3,4,5 These specialized program target student deficits with regard to phonics and comprehension. Intensive Intervention Strategic Intervention Reteach from the Go Math Program AISTeacher Push In This program remediates specific skills or strategies taught in a specific Math unit. See ELA above Small group push in During the school day 2x per week. See ELA above. See ELA above. 2  Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Incorporated into ELAwith Passports Program ● Speech Teachers ● Counseling by Social Worker and Guidance Counselor Occupational Therapist. The Amplify Science Program will be used. See ELA above/ Passport Program See ELA above See ELA above All services are individual and small group. All services are individual and small group All services are during school hours 3  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) There are 107 students officially identified as living in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students in temporary housing will receive the same services offered to the general population of students and sub group populations of PS 315K. These services include uniforms, uniforms, books, glasses, availability of the free after school programs both academic and enrichment, at- risk counseling, and meals. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 4  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 5  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. PS 315K is a school founded on the premise that the performing arts contribute to a well-rounded education and greater academic achievement. All teachers at PS 315K are highly qualified in their academic content areas and the Fine Arts teachers are highly qualified in their respective disciplines. (music, visual arts, dance) Teachers remain knowledgeable about current trends in their educational fields by attending weekly Professional Development meetings conducted through the city. In house support teachers also conduct Professional Development on the current trends in education as well as the Chancellor’s Framework for Great Schools. New teachers are assigned a mentor to assist them in their areas of concern to further their development pedagogically. Classroom lab sites are set up on different grade levels for teacher intervisitation and support. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Teachers are provided with high quality Professional Development every Monday afternoon for 80 minutes to develop their skills pedagogically. After giving the staff a needs survey and utilizing the data derived from the Danielson observations, Professional Development has centered on Danielson 3B, 3C, and 3D. These areas include effective questions and discussion, student engagement, and assessment. Further data from walkthroughs and observations include the need for PD on multiple entry points. PD topics have included Effective Questioning, Academic Rigor, and Peer Conversations. Classroom Environment, Conflict Resolution, UDL, Think Central, Datacation, Echalk, Reading Plus, Writing High Quality IEP’s, Mathematical Problem Solving, Mathematical Discourse, Math Explorations. Our math ambassador worked on different grade levels to hone in on the Productive Struggle element of Problem Solving. Paraprofessionals have been provided with workshops on Small Group Instruction, Looking at the IEP, Student Behavior,etc Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 6  N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Prekindergarten students get to visit Kindergarten classrooms throughout the school year. The teacher takes them on a tour of the school building to familiarize the students with the school building. In September, we will hold a Kindergarten Fair for the PreK Parents and provide them information about all the services the school provides. An overview of the Kindergarten curriculum is provided to the parents. The PS 315K Parent Handbook is given at this time. Students will be given a special book Miss Bindergarten Gets Ready for Kindergarten. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The school level MOSL Committee chooses the assessments that are utilized to determine student progress. Teachers utilize the assessments from the Journeys Common Core and Go Math Programs and meet during Teacher Inquiry to monitor and revise these assessments to meet the needs of the students in their classrooms. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section 7  Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 505692 20,729 14,670 4400.00 4,267,772 references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X X X X x Column B Section Reference(s) Sections 6,7,8,9 Sections 6,7,8,9 Sections 6,7,8,9 Sections 6,7,8,9 Sections 6,7,8,9 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not 8  available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 9  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S K315, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students PS 315K will support parents and families of Title I students by: 0  ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 1  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; 2  ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 315K , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; 3  ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; 4  ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; 5  ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 6  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? The Community School Strategy will be integrated into the academic instruction in the following ways: Integration of school and CBO to provide targeted student support to grade 2 students.   This additional support will help increase academic achievement for all students with a focus on language acquisition for ENL learners, the testing grades with an emphasis on Math including productive struggle in problem solving, fluency, and a deeper understanding of the mathematical strands.  A focus on the arts to showcase students’ talents and increase students’ self-esteem. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. -Bring every student up to high standards. -Incorporate curriculum activities which involve critical thinking and encourage students’ discussion and participation. -integrate reading and writing with a focus on process skills. -Focus on productive struggle in Math Problem solving, foundational Math skills. -Incorporate STEM activities, language acquisition for ENL learners and the integration of arts' enrichment activities both during and after school. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? Achieving our Community School Goals in Expanded Learning Time, Attendance Supports, and Family Engagement in the following ways: Expanded Learning Time Targeted academic intervention for improving student and school academic performance; enhanced arts’ enrichment after school program which will establish a seamless after school program that targets students learning challenges, focuses on test preparation in grades 3,4,5, language acquisition for ENL learners, and an enhanced arts’ after school enrichment program 7  Youth Development Creating a college and career ready school environment to ensure a college bound future and close the opportunity gap for young people by implementing a daily after school academic, stem, and arts’ enrichment period; providing activities that allow for student choice and input. Family and Community Engagement Bringing parents and families into the school community to partner in their child’s education. This will be achieved by partnering with the PA and Parent Coordinator to assess family needs and the appropriate services, academic focused parent/student learning events, parent and family learning workshops, and opportunities for families to socialize in the school community. Health and Wellness (including Social and Emotional Well Being) Health and wellness is achieved by attention to all aspects of social, emotional, physical, and moral development to ensure students reach their full potential as productive, caring, and responsible citizens. Youth empowerment will be accomplished through student goal setting each quarter, implementation of student groups as forum to address age specific developmental needs, implementing recreational activities that foster physical expression and development, implement arts’ activities that target individual students’ talents and create an individual student mentor to serve as a role model to build a trusting and positive relationship. Attendance Supports Attendance will be monitored carefully on a weekly basis. The Community Director will make parent outreach to ensure that each student has the required number of days enrolled to ensure full time participation status in the program. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Leadership Program Target Population Students in grades 1-5 Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal 300 students enrolled in enrichment clubs including Dance, Theater, Voice, Readers' Literacy, Girls Leadership Group, Basketball, Leadership Games, Homework Help/Yoga, Music. The school community will develop all children’s critical thinking and social interaction skills in a nurturing, collaborative environment so all children can achieve high academic standards and be productive citizens in a 21st century global environment. 8  Keys to Abundant Life Students in grades 1-5 Cooking and nutrition activities for students. The school community will develop all children’s sense of health and awareness of a healthful lifestyle by engaging in an awareness of creating a healthy diet through cooking as well as a mindfulness of living through yoga, physical fitness activities that also contribute to positive team building. All families will be tested and made aware of the importance of vision testing and early detection. Instruct students in the fundamentals of chess playing through critical thinking and problem solving. Students will develop critical thinking and strategic problem solving through the game of chess in a competitive setting. DOH for Vision Screening Chess in the Schools Students in grades 1-5 Students in grades 3-5 Vision testing for all students grades Pre-K -5 that attend PS 315K. Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The resources needed to achieve our Community Schools goal includes a Community Schools Director, club facilitators, classroom space, enrichment club materials, school personnel including teachers, paraprofessionals, parent coordinator and administration, academic club materials, communication supplies, logistical scheduling for effective transition to facilitate a seamless day. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside X 21st Century SIG Grant School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time 2. 9  3. 4. (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 1 .A community school director was hired through the interview process and through a collaboration with the administration arrived at the type of after school program the school would benefit from. Since PS 315K is a School of Performing Arts, we chose Arts' Enrichment as part of our after school menu of clubs. The Community School Director conducted a survey to see what type of Enrichment Clubs the students preferred which tapped into their interests as well as parents needs. She then prepared an invitation to join the 21st Century After School Program and then they were invited to apply. The Community Schools Director held an orientation in which parents received an overview of the premise of Community Schools and what clubs would be offered to their children. 2.In addition to the above mentioned protocols, parent meetings were held and individualized student programs for different days of the week were established. We also had to coordinate with the other CBO to make sure there were no student or scheduling conflicts due to shared space. We will coordinate with our instructional program by providing before school and after school academic and social/emotional programs. 3. We plan to integrate parent workshops and family events to encourage a parental involvement component. We had a Health Fair where the Leadership Program, Keys to Abundant Life and community vendors participated to promote an overall wellness approach to healthy living. We will be working to plan other parent involvement activities in conjunction with the Leadership Program. 4. The administration plans to meet with the Community School Director every Friday to reflect on the events of the week, student attendance, and students that might be a concern to a particular facilitator. Events will be planned during this time. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 0  Community Partners will include:  Principal  Assistant Principal  Community Schools Director  Parent Coordinator  Enrichment Club Facilitators  Academic Program School Personnel  Paraprofessionals  Kitchen Staff  Custodial Staff We will meet with members of the School Community Team on the last Friday of the month at 1:30. These members will include the Principal, Assistant Principal, Community Schools Director, Parent Coordinator. We will examine overall attendance data and specific club data to assess the quality of the clubs. Student surveys will be disseminated twice a year to monitor and revise choice selections and to gauge the overall satisfaction of the students. Students programs will be adjusted accordingly and interventions such as a club change or counseling may be offered . Specific clubs such as a Girls' Club or Boys' Club may be formulated to focus on self esteem issues if needed. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. The resources needed to achieve our Community Schools goal includes a Community Schools Director, club facilitators, classroom space, enrichment club materials, school personnel including teachers, paraprofessionals, parent coordinator and administration, academic club materials, communication supplies, logistical scheduling for effective transition to facilitate a seamless day. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Implementation will be from September, 2018 through June , 2019. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 1  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: PS315K will provide Saturday Academy for English Language Learners (ELLs) to support language development and high academic achievement in Math and ELA. Our ENL students are receiving services according to the compliance guidelines for ENL instruction during the regular school days as mandated by CR-154. Entering ELL students are required to have 360 minutes of ENL instruction per week (180 minutes of integrated and 180 minutes of stand alone instruction). Emergent ENL students are required to have 360 minutes of ENL instruction per week ( 90 minutes of integrated , 90 of either integrated or stand alone and 180 minutes of integrated instruction). ENL students in the transitional category require 180 minutes of ENL instruction per week (90 minutes integrated, 90 minutes either integrated or stand alone). Expanding ENL students require 180 minutes of ENL instruction weekly all of the integrated model. Commanding ENL students require 90 minutes per week of ENL instruction altogether, all of the integrated model. To complement the regular service of ELLs, Saturday Academy provides intense instruction to meet the grade level standards in Literacy and Math as well as in English Language Development as measured by ELA, Math and the NYSESLAT. According to recent NYSESLAT data, students have difficulty with the listening and writing part of the NYSESLAT. Therefore, our Saturday Academy program will focus on developing listening and writing skills. In math, students will acquire academic vocabulary to better understand math concepts and word problems. The program starts in October and ends in May. It takes place on Saturdays from 9-12 pm. The language of instruction is English with supplemental native language supports. We have four licensed ENL teachers to teach our program. One teacher instructs the K-1 students, another teacher has a group of 2nd graders combined with newcomer students from all grades, a third teacher instructs 3rd and 4th grade students and a fourth teacher instructs the 5th grade students. Each class has approximately 12-15 students. Our ENL department will provide workshops for parents so they can support their children academically at home as well. Translators will be available to help the parents understand the content of the workshops. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The ENL Coordinator and ENL Support Teacher will conduct Professional Development sessions to both ENL and Common Branch teachers pertaining to effective ENL Instruction. Our ENL and ELA Ambassadors will provide Professional Development which will focus on incorporating the ENL strategies into the Balanced Literacy Prototype. Writing is another PD 3  Part C: Professional Development focus for all teachers of ENL students. An ENL writing teacher will be providing additional support in the area of writing for grades K-5. The Math Support Teacher and Math Ambassador will provide Professional Development sessions on using content area math vocabulary and problem solving with ENL students. ENL instruction aligned to the Common Core State Standards will be provided by the ENL and academic support staff. Monthly dates for these sessions will be set up during the 80 minute Monday PD . Topics to be covered include: Scaffolding Instruction for ENL Students, Planning for All Students with UDL in Mind, Language Acquisition vs. Language Disability, Advanced Literacy, Differentiating Instruction for ENL students, The Integrated Co Teaching Models. and Thinking Routines to Promote Effective Discussion for All Learners. These Professional Development sessions are valuable to the entire PS 315K Staff as every class has ENL students within their general population. The ENL support staff attend Professional Development sessions given by the Brooklyn South Field Support Office. They turn key the information to the PS 315K staff. They also offer PD support to the teachers as they conduct their integrated instruction on a daily basis. Once a month the ENL teachers attend the Ambassador study groups to share best practices and enhance their pedagogy. All attendance and sign-in sheets are kept in the Professional Learning binder in the Principal's office. PS 315K is part of the Continuous Learning initiative comprising of districts 20 and 22. The premise of this program is to move the proficiency levels of the ENL students through small changes pertaining to instruction. The change idea chosen by PS 315K was through professional development by examining instruction in designated classrooms which focused on peer observation of language acquisition practices. Teams of teachers were established with the purpose of viewing the existing strategies and building upon these practices through targeted professional development. The teachers involved participated in inquiry revolving around the change idea which was initially focused on visual supports. The Continuous Learning Teacher Team met as a cohort and reflected on the strategy chosen as the change idea. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: At the beginning of the school year, parents are invited to attend a PA meeting where the parent coordinator provides the parents with a survey so they can request topics to be discussed throughout the year. Based on the survey, the parent coordinator organizes meetings on a monthly basis such as Tea with Angie, Breakfast with the Principal, ELA and Math content area workshops and specialized workshops which take place in the evenings. We also have orientation meetings for parents whose children are heading to Middle School. Tea with Angie takes place first week of each month, Breakfast with the Principal takes place the last Monday of each month and the ELA and Math workshops take place two months prior to the Math and ELA test. Middle School orientation also takes place at this time. All the letters to parents are translated in Spanish, Creole, Urdu and Bengali. We also have School Blackboard which is a phone messaging service to remind parents of upcoming events. In addition we have 4  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities translators available at all parent meetings. All agendas, invitations, and sign-in sheets are kept on file in the Principal's Professional Learning binder kept in the Principal's Office. The money from the translation budget is used to pay for paraprofessionals to attend after school workshops and translate for parents. We also have a NYSESLAT PD for parents to understand the format of the test which will measure the language acquisition of their children . We also use the 40 minute Parent Engagement time every Tuesday to conduct mini workshops for parents of our ENL students. Specific workshops for ENL parents consist of the following: 1. An orientation meeting to apprise parents of the different types of ENL programs. These include transitional ENL, Bilingual and Dual Language. Translation will be provided in the dominant languages such as French Creole, Spanish, Bengali, Urdu, etc. 2. Workshops on the Common Core State standards in Literacy and Math. 3. Workshop on the NYS Assessments for ENL parents. 4. ENL Strategies in the different content areas for ENL parents to help their students. 5. Family Literacy Night where teachers model good reading practices that parents can use with their students. Each student will leave with a book. 6. Family Math Night: Students will participate in Math games with their parents to encourage oral language development and the use of Math vocabulary. 7.NYSESLAT Informational Workshop for Parents. 8. Multicultural Night: Every parent will contribute a dish from their country of origin. Parents will dress in clothing representative of their culture and students will study the cultures of their countries of origin. These workshops will be provided by the ENL Coordinator, Instructional Coach and Parent Coordinator. Parents will be notified by the school blackboard system, parent letters or fliers, Class Dojo, Echalk and Pupil Path. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Title III After School Program from January through May. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Per session 15 weeks @ 48.00 per session times 3 hours each teacher times four teachers = 576.00. 576.00 times 15 weeks = 8640.00 Per session for ENL Workshops for Literacy, Math Night and ENL related topics. 48.00 x 3 hours =144 x 4 teachers = 576.00 576.00 x 3 sessions = 1728.00 5  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 0 30 NYSESLAT practice books from Sussman Sales at 12.00 per book = 360.00. 9 tablets @ 400.00 = 3600.00 Notebooks, pencils, paper = 340.00 0 0 0 14,668.00 . These are the NYSESLAT program materials for the students in grades K-5. Technology for Title III Program There will be no travel expenses There will be no additional expenses. Total of the Title III Expenditures 6  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 22 School Name School of Performing Arts Borough Brooklyn School Number 315 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Judith Ranft-Quartana Coach Lorna Baachus ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Maria Khan/ENL Teacher Teacher/Subject Area Manisha Wilson/ENL TeacherDore Teacher/Subject Area Emily Ramos-Bonilla/ENL Teache Related-Service Provider Monica Critser/IEP Teacher Superintendent Assistant Principal Denise Ellman Coach Joanne Fava, Math Coach School Counselor Marissa Ruffus Parent Mrs.Er Parent Coordinator Angela Gonzalez Field Support Center Staff Member Natalie Noble Hemmings Other (Name and Title) Lisette Claudio (Social Worker C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 4 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 4 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 7  D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 677 Total number of ELLs 110 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 16.25% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 4 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? : PS315K utilizes Teacher's College Benchmarks Assessments to identify strengths and weaknesses in skills pertaining to Early Literacy such as identifying high-frequency words and initial sounds in words. Recognizing blends, word segmentation, rhyming, phonemic awareness, reading comprehension skills and reading accuracy are skills that are tested on these assessments. TCRWP assessments allow teachers to examine data more thoroughly and identify skills that students are lacking, so that the teachers can offer strategies to support ENL students in areas of need. We also utilize the Journeys Reading Program beginning of year assessment which measures grade appropriate skill base and comprehension strategies. Writing is an area of focus with our ENL students as well as oral language development. More experiences are needed to expose the ENL 8  students to vocabulary and language. More phonics instruction needs to be incorporated into the Literacy Prototype with a greater emphasis on Guided Reading infusing ENL strategies to move the ENL students academically in Literacy. More interactive computer based activities must be implemented to meet the ELL students at their entry levels. We have incorporated lower and upper grade ENL support with two ENL push in personnel to meet the needs of our growing ENL population. With the Part 154 money, I hope to hire an ENL writing teacher to provide support to ENL students in ENL areas of need such as writing. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Teachers' College Benchmarks are administered three times per year; in September, February, and June. Journeys Common Core and Go Math assessments and Performance Tasks are given after each chapter or unit. The Data Specialist coordinated the assessment windows so teachers are aware of the time frame for administering the assessments. Two ENL support teachers are also available to assist with the assessments of the ENL teachers. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of any ELL program can be demonstrated by the ELL students meeting their annual AYP goals and their progress on the NYSESLAT assessment. If students are progressing to the next ELL level of language proficiency, then the program can be deemed successful. ELL student who make progress within the general classroom is another indicator as to whether the ELL programs are successful. Assessments such as the TCRWP benchmarks are indicators as to whether a child is progressing in literacy within the general ed classroom as it measures growth in reading fluency and comprehension. Oral language development is also measured as students need to be able to orally demonstrate comprehension of leveled texts. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We have two push in ENL certified teachers to provide the ENL hours of instruction as determined by their ENL status. Both our literacy and math programs have provisions for ENL instructional modifications to provide entry points for our ENL learners. We use Title III funds to set up a Saturday program to work on oral and written language skills and to provide test preparation gfor our ENL students. We have also identified a fifth grade teacher who has her Bilingual Extension certification to target the grade 5 ENL students by placing them in her classroom where the recommended number of ENL service hours can be provided. This will alleviate some of the student load for the ENL teacher who pushes in to the other other third, fourth, and fifth grade classes to facilitate a schedule more conducive to time compliance as per Part 154. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Data analysis is done on the classroom level , grade level, and school wide level. Students' strengths and challenges are tracked first within the individual classroom. Trends are then recorded across grade level bands and then across the school as a whole. Teachers formulate their reading and math groups according to the data they have gathered. Modifications to instruction are provided within the small group setting to target tier 2 students. The RTI teacher and Data Specialist look at the school wide data and pulls the struggling Tier 3 students in a one to one or one to two setting. This targets specific challenges the students may encounter within the larger classroom setting. The RTI teacher and ENL Coordinator also provides classroom support to teachers through Professional Development specific to the needs of the ENL student. Title III services which are conducted after school are provided to the ELL students. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Data analysis from the 2016-17 NYSESLAT administration yielded the following results. After looking through the data, the ENL Coordinator , Data Specialist , Principal and Assistant Principal noticed that the major area of weakness across all grade levels was in the writing modality. Our ENL students have a difficult time writing in English for critical analysis and evaluation. The second area of weakness was in the reading modality,especially in the areas of phonics and comprehension skills. As the NYSESLAT has been aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards the reading passages have become longer, more sophisticated, and contain more challenging vocabulary so therefore instruction must be tailored to meet the entry levels of these students with an emphasis on vocabulary, oral language , and Guided Reading to improve fluency and comprehension. 9  7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Data pertaining to ENL students is disseminated during Monday Professional Development Sessions or Tuesdays after school during Teacher Inquiry Sessions where trends are analyzed and best practices to target areas of challenge are discussed. These meetings can be horizontal grade level meetings or vertical grade meetings to discuss the various needs of the students as they progress through the different grades. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Kindergarten is self-contained and the students are grouped based on the teacher's analysis of the NYSITEL. ENL is taught daily and is incorporated in all subjects during the day. First and second grades follow the push-in model with 90 minutes of instruction daily for 4 days. Students are grouped according to their NYSITEL and NYSESLAT levels. For Entering and Emerging students, stand-alone ENL is provided 180 minutes. and 90 minutes. respectively. Third, fourth and fifth grades receive the push in or pull-out model according the their English proficiency levels. In some instances, students are grouped heterogeneously in continuous grades. Continuing in September 2017, former ENL students will receive 90 minutes of instruction per week for two years. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Instruction is given according to students' proficiency levels in English. Entering and emerging levels receive ENL instruction 360 minutes per week; transitioning and expanding levels will receive 180 minutes per week and commanding students will receive 90 minutes per week. In Kindergarten self-contained ENL classes, and in the push-in and pull-out models, the instruction is differentiated according to the English proficiency levels. In order to be in compliant, we anticipate large groups since we have to accommodate all different levels. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Core content is delivered by certified teachers in each program model. ENL teachers push in to classrooms that contain ENL students. The Integrated Co Teaching model is followed. ENL teachers plan for instruction with the classroom teacher. Parallel teaching takes place with the ENL teacher utilizing ENL strategies such as scaffolded instruction, picture support for new vocabulary, and computer interactive programs. They use ENL methodologies and strategies to make content accessible to the students, such as graphic organizers, visual tools, realia, TPR and UDL strategies in their instruction. Tier I, II and III vocabulary is taught explicitly to facilitate comprehension to all ENL students in each subject area. ENL scaffolds are embedded within the teachers' instructional plan. PS 315K has monitored and revised the Literacy program. We moved to Journeys Common Core which has a strong ENL component embedded into the instructional framework. 0  The Go Math instructional program has materials in Spanish for those students who need support in their Native Language. The Go Math program also has provisions to modify instruction to meet the ENL challenges embedded within its prototype.All programs utilized at PS 315K are Common Core aligned with end of unit Performance Tasks in both Literacy and Math. We halve also utilized the Exemplars performance tasks in Math which provide the same Performance Task offered at different levels of a students' ability which facilitates the mastery of our struggling students in all populations. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? In addition to translated tests, bilingual staff members are employed to administer and translate assessments throughout the year. The students are also provided with Bilingual Glossaries to support them in content area. Exit slips are also helpful to determine the areas of weakness and strength in the content area for ELL students. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE students will have intensive instruction provided after a thorough analysis of the data in phonics, vocabulary, phonemic awareness, blending, writing, segmenting, decoding, and comprehension. This is done by utilizing pictures, graphic organizer, realia, computer reading programs and listening centers. These students will have to be assessed on a regular basis to monitor progress. SIFE students will be grouped and mainstreamed to designated classrooms according to their proficiency levels. b. Newcomer students will receive 360 minutes of service in ENL instruction in intensive vocabulary instruction and grammar. Students will be provided bilingual dictionaries and visuals to make content comprehensible. These students will practice all modalities of the English language, speaking, listening, reading and writing. Students will be paired with other proficient students of their native language. They will be provided with listening centers, computers, teacher modeling and collaborative tasks with their other peers to practice their speaking skills. They will be allowed to use their own language if necessary. c. Developing ENL students will be provided their recommended amount of ENL instruction. The ENL coordinator will push into the classes where these students are located and provide scaffolds for them to meet their grade level standards in the four modalities. There will be more interactive smart board based lessons to provide the auditory and visual support so critical to ENL mastery. Computer based programs such as Award Learning and Imagine Learning will also be included in the differentiated instructional plan for these students. d. Long Term ENL's will require the same supports as the seen in the SIFE, newcomer, and developing ENL student depending on their proficiency level. e. Differentiation for former ENL's will be provided through a push in model by the ENL coordinator to ensure that proper entry points are applicable to facilitate student understanding of content learned. Differentiation will come in the form of flexible grouping within the general ed classroom. Scaffolds such as visual and auditory tools, graphic organizers to build understanding, and computer supports are some ways differentiation can be approached to meet the needs of the former ENL students. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Instructional strategies and grade level materials that target students who are classified as both ENL and SWD's include looking at the individual learning styles of these students and planning instructional strategies that access these learning styles. ENL and SWD program supports are embedded into both the Journeys and Go Math programs. Visual instructional aids need to be utilized by staff to access students' understanding of material taught. Teacher modeling is critical to students who are both ENL's and SWD"s. Modeled reading and writing is critical to student mastery of these important content areas. Interactive technology such as AWARD Learning, Imagine Learning, Reading A-Z, Journeys Think Central, Reading Plus, Go Math, RTI and 1  Soar to Success will be incorporated into a teacher's instructional plan to meet the different instructional entry points of these students. IEP's associated ENL: students must also be looked at carefully to align IEP goals with ENL instructional strategies. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our ENL students with special needs are placed in either a self-contained or ICT classes as per their IEP recommendations. These students receive services from a licensed pull-out teacher. Support services as indicated by their IEPs as well as AIS services are provided as well. Tiered activities that address students' ability levels and learning styles are utilized as a differentiated instructional approach, within the classroom setting, providing students with a variety of entry points to the curriculum. Technology support and SMART board technology provide an interactive approach for ENL students with disabilities. Alternate placement paraprofessionals are assigned to students when needed. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ENL students participate in small groups with an ENL pull out teacher for a minimum of three sessions per week. Students are also given an opportunity for small group instruction on Saturdays and after school with the Title III program. Selected students are given one on one tutoring through the Reading Partners Program and the RTI teacher. In math, Soar to Success, Mathletics, and Exemplars will be used to provide additional support as needed. Students receive instruction in small groups formulated according to their academic needs in Math. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? This school year, we will continue to have added another ENL Support Teacher for grades K, 1, and 2 due to the increasing number of ENL students and the demands of the new initiatives. With the Part 154 money, I hope to hire a writing support teacher to push into classrooms to support the ENL students. I have also created a grade 5 class which houses the majority of our ENL grade 5 students. I have a grade 5 teacher with a ENL certification who can provide ENL services to these students allowing for more students to be serviced under the Part 154 compliance guidelines. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? The Dual Language Program could not be sustained because we did not have the number of Spanish proficient kindergarten students needed to sustain its implementation. The monolingual students that were interested in the Dual Language Program were placed in Gen. Ed. classes and the Spanish speaking students are given ENL services. If the numbers become relevant we would proceed to open a Dual Language Program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our school makes every effort to ensure that ENL students have equal access to educational opportunities by providing them with high quality, rigorous instruction and appropriate support services. All ENL students are included in all after school supplemental programs and take part in the extracurricular arts, such as chorus, band, violin, visual arts and student government. There is no difference in the way the ENL students are invited to participates in any school program, curricular or extracurricular. ENL students are invited to participate in Title III Programs, Chess Program, Art Program, Dance programs and after school academic programs. Residencies are offered throughout the school year which include ENL participation. We have Ballroom Dancing, Musical Theater, Chorus, Ballet, Very Special Art Program, Hip Hip Dance Group, and Broadway through Dance. Any test prep or remedial program is equally offered to the ENL population. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We have an array of appropriate instructional materials for our ENL students Text books, big books, leveled texts, workbooks, grammar books, dictionaries, glossaries, posters, flash cards and other hands on materials are used when instructing our ENL students. We have software targeting language development in our classrooms. Native language books are provided in the school library. The school has Go Math in Spanish for grades 3-5. The AWARD Reading and Imagine Learning Program is also 2  used as a supplemental support which is used in school as well as at home. The Journeys Common Core aligned Reading Program will be available in Spanish, as well as, English for students who need the language support. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? . The ENL Coordinator is fluent in Spanish , Creole, and French to support the native speakers of those languages. Alternate placement paraprofessionals are assigned to designated students who need support in different languages. Both the Journeys and Go Math Programs have included resources in Spanish. Translation of any instructional resource can be accessed through our diverse staff of teachers , paraprofessionals and school aides. We also have the Black Box phone system and our Echalk school website which offer translation services to our parents. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Depending on the grade level, students are provided with ENL practice books which are used to complement the skills that are being taught. Activities found in the NYSESLAT practice books from Continental Press and Attanasio are also used. Award Reading is provided to the classrooms for the appropriate grade levels both for the regular day and Title III Program. Students are grouped within their classroom settings to meet their academic needs in the content areas. Instruction is differentiated to include ENL scaffolds to facilitate mastery. Visual aids are posted in the classroom to meet the UDL needs of the students. Ongoing checks for understanding are recorded by the classroom teacher to track academic growth. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We have an array of appropriate instructional materials for our ENL students. Text books, big books, leveled texts, workbooks, grammar books, dictionaries, glossaries, posters, flash cards and other hands on materials are used when instructing our ENL students. We have software targeting language development in our classrooms. Native language books are provided in the school library. The school has Go Math in Spanish for grades 3-5. The AWARD Reading and Imagine Learning Program is also used as a supplemental support which is used in school as well as at home. The Journeys Common Core aligned Reading Program will be available in Spanish, as well as, English for students who need the language support. This year since we are a co-located school, we will be looking to combine some after school programs with PS 152K to combine resources and make a more efficient use of both schools' resources. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). A parent meeting to explain the protocols of the school is scheduled for ENL parents outlining the different programs available to the ENL students. The support staff is introduced to the parents at this time. The parent coordinator, Guidance Counselor, ENL Coordinator and the Kindergarten ENL teacher introduce themselves and give a synopsis of their roles. The SBST Team also introduces themselves and explains their roles in the event an ENL student requires an IEP. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? There are currently no language electives available. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A 3  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Outside professional development is offered by the Office of English Language Learners for teachers servicing ELL students. It is the goal of this professional development to provide the instructional support for teacehrs to instruct ELLs in all subject areas as well as set high expectations for these students to make the same yearly progress that is required of all students. We have hired consultants from CITE to assist in ELL Professional Development both through coaching and workshops. Workshops are also conducted by the ELL Coordinator and support person. The Principal and Assistant Principal also provide Professional Development. PD is conducted weekly on Monday after noons from 2:20-3:40. Our PD calendar is outlined below: Sept 6: Revisiting Questioning and Discussion Techniques to Get Students Speaking in the Classroom. Sept. 21: Utilizing the Literacy Handbook conducted by the Literacy Coach and AP Sept. 22: Revisiting Guided Reading. Sept. 28: Common Planning October 5: Academic Rigor conducted by Ada Orlando from CITE October 26: Student goal setting in ELA and Math conducted by Lorna Bacchus and JoAnn Fava, Literacy and Math Coaches Nov. 2: ENL strategies conducted by Manisha Wilson and Maria Khan Nov. 3: Rigor in the Mathematics Classroom conducted by John Benton , our Math consultant This is a sample of our PD calendar. We are continuously monitoring and revising the calendar according to need. These dates are subject to change.PD is offered to all teachers, including Guidance Counselors, Related Service Providers, Secretaries and Parent Coordinators. This is a living document and is developed as we move through the academic year and ascertain the needs of the staff. Professional development will be delivered through the designated Professional Development time on Monday afternoons and district Professional Development meetings. The Chancellor's Professional Development Days will also be used to deliver professional development pertaining to ENL instruction. Teacher Ambassadors who attend district wide Professional Development will turnkey information pertaining to ENL instruction to the staff who service the ENL population. See question 1 for specific activities. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. ENL students going to middle school will be invited to attend orientation sessions in the evening with their parents. The Parent Coordinator will facilitate these sessions. The ENL Coordinator is present at these orientations to provide translation as needed. We document every meeting and workshop with an attendance sheet and agenda to ensure that PD hours are supplied to the staff. In addition to ENL teachers, all staff members are provided with professional development from the district, city, and school. Staff members will attend these workshops and turnkey information to the remaining staff members. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? PS315 utilizes Parent Engagement Time on Tuesdays to interact with parents by phone, in person or via email. Our diverse staff is able to translate when necessary. Goals of the ENL programs are provided at the initial Parent Choice Meeting, during Meet the Teacher Night in September, and on Parent Engagement Tuesdays. 4  2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents of newly enrollled students are invited to attend an orientation meeting where the ENL program is introduced. Invitation letters are sent home in many languages and phone calls are made when needed. Parents review a DVD entitled "Orientation for Parents of ENL Learners" provided by the Office if English Language Learners. Parents are given an opportunity to meet the staff at "Meet the Teacher Night" which is held in September. On that night, ENL parents are also invited to attend an orientation of the ENL program in the school. This night is usually well attended. Parent Teacher Conferences, curriculum nights and workshops are also given. The Black Box Messenger System is used to keep ENL parents informed of the different activities that are available. Letters are sent notifying parents of meetings or workshops in the major languages found in our school. Translators are provided at meetings and workshops . The ENL Coordinator is also the Language Access Coordinator which focuses on translation. in the different modes of communication. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 5 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Judith Ranft-Quartana, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 6  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: 22K315 School DBN: 22K315 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Judith Ranft-Quartana Principal Denise Ellman Assistant Principal Angela Gonzalez Parent Coordinator Maria Khan ENL/Bilingual Teacher Mrs.Er Parent Manisha Wilson Teacher/Subject Area Doreen Fandacone Teacher/Subject Area Lorna Bacchus JoAnn Fava Coach Coach Marissa Ruffus School Counselor Natalie Noble Hemmings Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Emily Bonilla Ramos Other ENL Teacher Monica Critser Other IEP Teacher Social Worker Other Lissette Claudio 09/05/17 09/05/17 09/05/17 09/05/17 09/05/17 09/05/17 09/05/17 09/05/17 09/05/17 09/05/17 09/05/17 09/05/17 09/05/17 09/05/17 09/05/17 7  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 22K315 School Name: PS 315K Superintendent: Julia Bove The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Maria Khan ENL Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. At registration, every new entrant to PS 315K is given a Home Language Identification Survey . Part 3 of the survey the parent records the language preferred for written and oral communication. Every parent is given the ethnicity form from ATS and the parent includes the student's ethnicity. Emergency cards are given in the preferred language of the home; lunch forms are also given in the preferred language of the student. All data from the tools listed above indicate the main languages include English, Spanish, Haitian Creole, Urdu, Bengali, Arabic, Turkish, and Uzbecki. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 8  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish English Spanish 75% in English 10% Spanish English Spanish 75% in English 10% in Spanish Haitian Creole Haitian Creole 10% Haitian Creole Haitian Creole 10% in Haitian Creole Uzbecki Uzbecki 5% Uzbecki Uzbecki 5% in Uzbecki 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. English, Spanish, Haitian Creole represent at least 10% of the school population. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to Families September: Welcome Back To School Letter, Parent Handbook, School Calendar, Meet the Teacher Night Letter, Curriculum Overview, PA Notification, Cell Phone Policy, Pernission to Photograph Student Letter, Reading Contract Letter, Notification of Days Off in September, Datacation letter, plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Translation of written communication includes the Echalk school website, the DOE Translation System, staff members from the different ethnicity's, and the ENL coordinator. Oral translation is done through the Blackbox phone system, Echalk, staff Parent Handbook Parent Letters PA Meetings Opening Day Letter Parent Teacher Conferences 9  After School Programs NYS Testing Calendar School Year Calendar Parent Calendar Breakfast with the Principal Monthly Letter School Events Parent Account letter, monthly calendar, Breakfast With The Principal and Assistant Principal, ELL Orientation, Birthday Party Policy and snacks, Behavior Contract and Lunchroom Contract members who speak and write fluently in the major languages that represent the school population. The ENL Coordinator facilitates this process. October: monthly calendar; parent workshops,PA Meeting, Breast Cancer Awareness Walk, March of Dimes; Halloween Safety; Parents' Visits to Classrooms, notification of Columbus Day holiday, student assembly/celebrations. notice of afterschool or Saturday Programs. November: monthly calendar,parent workshops,PA Meeting, half day notice for PTC Conferences, notice of PTC conference, days off including Veteran's Day, Election Day and Thanksgiving Recess, student assemblies/ celebrations, report cards. December: monthly calendar, parent workshops,PA Meeting, notice of days off, notice of 0  afterschool or Saturday Programs. January : monthly calendar, parent workshops,PA Meeting, testing calendar, student celebrations, progress report, promotion in doubt letter, notice of snow days. February: monthly calendar, parent workshops, PA Meeting,student celebrations, notice of February Recess and Chinese New Year; February Break Test Prep Academy, March: monthly calendar, parent workshops, PA Meeting,student celebrations, notice of report cards, half day, and parent teacher conferences, April: monthly calendars, parent workshops,PA Meeting, student celebrations, notice of Spring Break, May: monthly calendar, parent workshops,PA 1  Meeting, student celebrations; progess reports, end of year calendar June: monthly calendar, parent workshops, PA meeting, end of year calendar, student celebrations. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings Formal face to face meetings include Parent engagement Tuesdays ongoing throughout the year, parent teacher conferences in September, November, March and May, Meet the Teacher Night in September, Parent Orientations in June and September,IEP Meetings ongoing throughout the year; behavior or academic concern meetings with Principal, Assistant Principal, Guidance Counselor, or Dean, attendance meetings with Principal ,Guidance Counselor or Attendance Teacher. The face to face meetings which occur on a monthly include Parent Engagement Meetings, IEP Meetings, Academic or Behavioral Progress Meetings, Attendance Meetings, PA Meetings, etc. How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Notices will go out to parents at least a week in advance and translated in the major languages. The Blackbox phone service will also notify parents of face to face meetings in their spoken language of choice. We plan on implementing the School App Express phone texting communication system which automatically translates messages between the 2  school and home in the predominantly spoken language of the family. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. PS 315K utilizes the Blackbox Phone System which translates communication from the school in all the major languages. The school Echalk website also translates information from the school for the parents in the major languages. Staff members representing the major ethnicity's will facilitate written translation when needed. We will be implementing the School Express Phone App which will allow the school to translate different school communications in the major languages. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The Translation and Interpretation Policy will be included in our Staff Handbook so all staff members are apprised of the protocols for written and oral communication. This will be a part of our initial staff meeting held on the first day the staff reports back to school. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We will display all of the above on our Parent Engagement Bulletin Board located on the second floor and at the security desk located at the entrance of the school. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent surveys are utilized to get feedback from parents pertaining to the quality and availability of services. We also incorporated Breakfast With the Principal and Assistant Principal where parents verbally give feedback about the services provided in the school. PA Meetings are also used to generate feedback from families about the different services the school provides. 3  4 
