2018-19 RISE SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (R-CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 19K328 School Name: P.S. 328 PHYLLIS WHEATLEY Principal: MARIE DESFORGES 2018-19 CEP-RISE 1  Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles Section 3: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 4: Rise School Narrative Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Community School Partnerships Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 10: Title I Program Information Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP-RISE 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information PHILLIS WHEATLEY 331900010328 PRE-K – GRADE 5 School Number (DBN): 19K328 330 ALABAMA AVENUE BROOKLYN, NY 11207 718 345-9393 718 345-6566 Phone Number: Marie Desforges Fax: MDesforges@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Community School CBO: Principal: Community School Director: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): TiannaCanady Marie Desforges ALECIA PATRICK Tameeka James Alecia Patrick TiannaCanady District Information Geographical District: 19 Superintendent’s Office Address: Dr. Thomas McBryde Jr. Superintendent: 557 PENNSYLVANIA AVENUE BROOKLYN NEW YORK 11207 TMcbrydejr@SCHOOLS.NYC.GOV Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-240-2700 Phone Number: 718-240-2747 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Brooklyn North FSC: Executive Director: BERNADETTE FITZGERALD 2018-19 CEP-RISE 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 131 LIVINGSTON STREET BROOKLYN, NY BFITZGE2@SCHOOLS.NYC.GOV Executive Director’s Email Address: 718 935-4300 Phone Number: 718 935-4314 Fax: 2018-19 CEP-RISE 4  Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles The Objective To guide, support and accelerate the early progress demonstrated by the schools graduating out of the Renewal program, as Rising Schools of Excellence (Rise), with a compelling theory of action, clear strategy for sustainment, targeted individualized supports, continued accountability, gradual release of responsibility, such that they independently accelerate their growth trajectory. Background Rise Schools have demonstrated: ● ● they have the will and conditions in place to accelerate student growth and meet school improvement benchmarks. they have the capacity to lead/implement a school improvement strategy. Rise Schools have seen some gains1 across multiple measures including graduation rates, college readiness, state test scores and attendance. As a result, these schools will fully transition out of the Renewal Schools program at the end of the 2017-2018 SY and continue under the guidance of the Office of Field Support, in partnership with the Office of School Support and Supervision. 1All Rise Schools met at least 67% of their benchmarks, are not on the State’s Priority list, and have demonstrated a sustainable school improvement structure that will allow them to build on their progress. Six Rise Keys for Continued Improvement 1. Strengthen the Instructional Core 2. Strengthen Instructional Leadership Capacity 3. 4. Apply a tiered approach to student intervention 5. Promote a positive, inclusive school environment for students, staff, parents and Improve Data Driven Practices community partners Increase monitoring and accountability 6. Theory of Action If the NYC Department of Education provides customized supports to Rise schools and principals designed around the “Six Rise School Keys for continued improvement” then, Rise principals and their teams will have the tools and resources to accelerate outcomes for ALL students and increase students’ access to an excellent and equitable education. Structure of the Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) The Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) will serve as the organizing and overarching document for each Rise school and will be directly aligned and developed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, and Strong Schools, Strong Communities, including the following: ● Rise Benchmarks: please refer to the 2018-19 Rise benchmarks provided to your school. ● Establishing an overarching summative vision aligned with elements of the Framework for Great Schools and documenting key areas of celebration and Rise through analysis of assessments and by envisioning what the desired outcome for each school will be at the end of the School Rise process. ● Setting mid-year point benchmarks that create the path for improvement by focusing on desired outcomes and goals. In this way, the plan will be mapped to the overarching summative vision. In addition to the five discrete goals formed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, each school will create an action plan. ● Transformation into a community school in order to increase student and family access to physical and mental health services and other social-emotional supports made available in or near the school. ● Expanded learning opportunities for all students, including additional instruction provided during afterschool and/or summer programming provided in collaboration with community partners. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 5  ● Intensive professional development for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and instruction aligned to the Next Generation Learning Standards (NGLS) and to support staff in effectively responding to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of all students. ● Additional, focused strategies to increase parent and family engagement. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Information on the Framework for Great Schools and the DTSDE Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and the R-CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 6  The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the American Institute of Research (AIR) Needs Assessment, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools – they call it a Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All Priority and Focus Schools and Focus 2018-19 CEP-RISE 7  Districts must use the new tool; and districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Education Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:  a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 8 a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC)  It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the R-CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the R-CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for R-CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists in every Rise school and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the American Institute of Research (AIR) needs assessment, the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Rise Key and the corresponding statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Discuss and respond to the guiding questions under each Framework element.  Step 5: Revisit your school’s current goals, and strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you have identified, and will let your school community know when you have reached your goal.  Step 6: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Complete the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and the Community School sections.  Step 9: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether strategies and activities outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust practices along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Rise Program Priorities Our Rise Theory of Action (page 4) is drawn from research1 on turnaround schools, the DOE Framework for Great Schools, DTSDE Tenets, and the Quality Review, which suggest that these key priorities have the greatest impact on student achievement. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 9  RISE Keys Priorities 1. Strengthen the Instructional Core 2. Strengthen Instructional Leadership Capacity 3. Improve Data Driven Practices 4. Apply a tiered approach to school support and intervention 5. Promote a positive, inclusive school environment for students, staff, parents and community partners 6. Increase monitoring and accountability  A clear focus aligned to students’ instructional needs, including college and career readiness  Access to common, standards-based curricula for all students, including ELLs and SWDs  Explicit and intentional embedding of culturally responsive Instruction in all content areas  Formative and summative assessments for all students in all grades that are aligned to curricula and produce clear evidence of learning  Tiered approach to teacher professional learning opportunities.  Partnership with families to increase engagement in students’ academic success  Implementation of a coherent vision for school improvement - a vision for leading learning, leading people, leading schools and leading change  Development of a system to support distributive leadership and build the capacity and sustainability of teacher leaders through continuous improvement  Developing leadership competencies, specific to turnaround efforts, including leveraging multiple stakeholders, a commitment to student learning and a sustained pursuit of measurable progress. Strategic allocation of resources to support instructional and professional learning plans and family engagement in leadership opportunities Integrative use of formative and summative assessment tools and practices to target resources and support throughout the year to achieve academic priorities    Ongoing analyses of school-wide and student-level data and adjustments to curricular resources and instructional moves  Prioritization of the use of standards and data to inform teaching and learning    Implementation of a tiered intervention system that engages teacher teams in frequent cycles of progress monitoring and adjustments to address diverse student needs School establishes coherent system, adopted by all to ensure that interventions are effective, differentiated and timely Increased use of teacher teams’ data-driven practices to accelerate student achievement  Clear strategy that establishes social norms within the school community and promotes a culture for learning with clear and high expectations for all students, in partnership with CBOs.  The sustainability of an environment where students feel safe, connected and engaged through practices that are culturally relevant and build their scholarly identity  The development of a whole school approach, in partnership with families, with   specific attention to social, physical and behavioral environments Social emotional learning practices embedded in teaching and learning as aligned to the Collaborative for Academic, Social and Emotional learning (CASEL) competencies and supported by CBOs. School leaders implement effective monitoring systems to ensure that instructional practices and interventions are monitored closely at the classroom, team, and school wide level  Establish effective teacher team practices that ensure teachers are accountable for data findings and set timely and appropriate interventions  Data analysis results in adjustments to the programs and priorities to better service   students Foster positive systems for accountability driven by reflection and action planning Support from district leaders to focus efforts toward results and problem solving actions that lead to turnaround success. 1. Darden/Curry PLE – Turnaround Leadership Competencies and Turnaround Action Shown to Influence Student Achievement 2018-19 CEP-RISE 10  Achievement Network – SY 18-19 Foundations Rubric COSEBOC Standards and Promising Practices for Schools Educating Boys of Color Harvard Graduate School of Education and Harvard Business School: Certificate in School Management and Leadership Learner-Centered Initiatives Multidimensional Principal Performance Rubric Monitoring and Accountability ● Rise schools will be monitored for implementation of the Rise Comprehensive Educational Plan (R+CEP) by Superintendents and Office of Field Support. ● Rise schools will be held accountable for making progress according to annual targets set by the Department of Education, as evidenced by their attainment of named benchmark scores for each annualized key metric. Schools not achieving annual targets by June 2019 are subject to additional oversight and consequences, to be determined at a later date. ● OFS will bring increased oversight and accountability by monitoring FSC supports to schools and ensure that these are aligned with the school’s instructional focus, student and teacher needs, and moving the school toward achieving interim goals. ● OSSS will monitor DSR oversight of all supports to Rise Schools. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 11  Section 3: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Directions: All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP). SLT members’ signatures indicates that they have been consulted with and given the opportunity to provide feedback on the plan and the plan’s alignment with the school-based budget to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Expanded Learning Time, Community School initiative, Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the second column. 2. 3. In the first column, indicate using an “X” if the person is an SLT member. In the third column, record the position and constituent group represented such as staff, parent, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), or other contributor. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 4. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the R-CEP, not approval. 5. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Signature (Blue Ink) Check if SLT x x x x Name Position and Constituent Group Marie Desforges Tonya Marrimon Tameeka James Tina Harmon Tianna Canady Counseling In Schools Represented *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Community School Director (staff) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two 2018-19 CEP-RISE 12  Check if SLT x x x X Name Position and Constituent Group Represented members required for high schools) Signature (Blue Ink) Choral Headley Nelson Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Velma Cole Rosa Nunez Alexandria Mc Cormick Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor 2018-19 CEP-RISE 13  Section 4: Rise School Narrative In a brief narrative, describe the current state of the Rise school addressing the following and please use existing data, where applicable: 1. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including your school’s mission statement and a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Identify any special student populations that the school has and what their specific needs are. 2. 3. Describe your school’s approach to family engagement and progress made with establishing families as partners in furthering student achievement 4. Describe how your school is leveraging community school partnerships to support progress in elements of the Framework for Great Schools and your Rise Benchmarks and indicate where this has been a challenge. 5. Summarize the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) opportunities that have been offered to your students this year. Public School 328 is dedicated to educating the mind and fostering the social-emotional development of our scholars. We emphasize the principles of dignity and self-worth. We have created a standards-based academic program that fosters our students’ problem solving and critical thinking abilities. We believe in the axiom; high expectations will yield high achievement. Our goal is to develop students who are not only college and career ready but have the skills necessary to compete on a global scale. We insist on the same high standards of excellence for all students in general education, English language learners, and special education. The home and school work together as partners for progress. Our students are encouraged to use their words and action to show respect and responsibility for themselves, their friends, teachers, school and the community. Public school 328 is a part of the East New York community. We serve Pre K- 5 with approximately 294 students attending with the following demographics: Hispanic 38.1% American Indian or Alaskan Native 1.02% Asian .68% Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander 1.7% Black 55.78% White 2.72% As a school community, we are committed to providing instruction through various mediums to ensure that we acknowledge and tap into the multiple intelligence of scholars. Currently, we have partnered with several organizations to support our scholars in receiving a well-balanced instructional program. Some of these organizations include: Studio in Schools  Creative Arts Music   Pens of Power  Beat Sense  Robotics   Coding STEM 2018-19 CEP-RISE 14  As we enter the 2018-2019 school year, we are looking to expand our STEM department into a STEAM department. The scholars will have an opportunity to engage in project-based learning program through a two block STEAM instructional period. During the first year of our STEAM program, we will create an introductory course introducing students to principals of engineering, introduction to engineering, conducting and executing research, global impact and introduction to STEM-based technology. Students will be engrossed in hands-on, inquiry-based problem-solving skills, research, collaborations and listening and speaking activities. Students will be required to present their problem and solution to their peers and the school learning community. In addition to our STEAM program, we are looking to expand on our arts program. Specifically, in our media department, we will continue to offer enrichment activities such as:  Poster making  Book printing Studio -music  Social-emotional-   Morning side as a part of a grant  4 Rs program  Chess in schools  Opera The majority of our scholars reside in the NYC housing surrounding the school and 1/3 of the scholars are currently living in temporary housing (shelters) located near the school building. Currently, we have 20% of our students living in temporary housing. To support this population we have partnered up with the Morningside program. Morningside's vision is to create caring, productive, and equitable schools where students learn the skills they need to contribute to their communities from the classroom to the world. The program delivers the 4Rs curriculum which uses children's literature as a springboard to strengthen students' social, emotional, and academic skills and build a caring classroom community As part of the NYC Renewal School Initiative, PS 328 is a Community School and continues to partner with Counseling in Schools who are working with the Parent Coordinator, Family Assistant, and other staff members to increase Parent Involvement and Engagement. The Framework for Great Schools Report shows the percentage of school surveys received was 98%. The survey shows 91% for teacher outreach to parents, but 86% for parent involvement in the school. The emphasis on parent engagement and involvement has been stressed. The Community Based Organization (CBO), Counseling in Schools (CIS) has four full-time staff members and continues to brainstorm inventive strategies to increase parental involvement at PS 328. The administration and the CBO are dedicated to addressing the challenge of combining the counseling services and parent engagement expectations to support the school. During Expanded Learning Time (2:20-3:35) all students in grades K -5 are mandated to receive five additional hours of instruction on Tuesdays, Wednesdays, Thursday, and Fridays beginning in September and ending in June. ELT is optional for Pre-K Students. Also, there is an after-school Scholar's Academy for one extra hour of instruction which is held on Tuesdays, Wednesdays, and Thursdays for students in grades 1-5, extending the instructional day to 4:35 p.m. This year during the Expanded Learning Time, we wanted to ensure that the instructional day was streamlined into the ELT period. We utilized funds from the PSSG grant to hire three part-time AIS teachers. The teachers worked with our "push-ables" (students scoring within the range of 2.4-2.9 on the ELA/Math state exam) and "slip-ables" (students scoring within the range of 2.0 - 2.3 on the ELA/Math state exam). These scholars were identified through our instructional cabinet, PPT team and triangulating data. We were able to strategically placed our students and match them with teachers to support their individual needs. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 15  2018-19 CEP-RISE 16  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 19K328 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 289 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 45 45 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 40 31 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 97.0% % Attendance Rate 95.5% % Reduced Lunch 14.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.7% 39.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.25 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 23.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 89% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Yes N/A 8 8 15 90.6% 2.1% 23.2% 53.3% 3.1% 0.7% 2 20% 5.8 23.4% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YSH NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP-RISE 17  2018-19 CEP-RISE 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. (aligned to Rise Keys 2 and 6) Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. (aligned to Rise Key 3) The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. (aligned to Rise Keys 1 and 4) Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. (aligned to Rise Key 1) 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed x x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Strengths : ● Social and Emotional Focus - 328 classrooms reflect a focus on social emotional needs of students. Classroom language throughout the school reflects positive, reflective empathetic environments. ● CBO/ Parent Support – There is a high level of support provided to parents from our Counseling in Schools. Parents are able to receive social and mental health support. ● The Arts/Trips – 328 has a rich arts program including two technology teachers, and one dance teacher. In addition, we are expanding our STEM program Collaboration with Morningside center to support with positive. 328 has included several out of trip opportunities for our students. Most Growth : In January of 2018 PS 328 had a PPR in the areas of 1.1 Curriculum, 1.3 Resource Allocation, 1.4 Learning Environment. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 19  2.2 Assessment 3.1 Goal Setting, 3.4 High Expectation, 4.2 Teacher Teams, 5.1 Monitoring and Revising. School Leader Practices and Decisions – Structures set in place where there is the most improvement : 1. Grade level Teams – meet weekly to look at student work in reading, writing and math. 2.Standard Based curriculum maps 9 week data cycles determining instructional and learning gaps with the development of an action plan and systematizing protocols for looking at student work 3. Data Team – meet and plan once weekly looking at school wide assessments to determine trends, gaps and strengths. 4. Google Docs accessing shared information across the school Part 2 – Summative Vision for Rigorous Instruction What is your school’s instructional focus? What is your vision for promoting the instructional focus consistently across classrooms? The PS 328 Instructional Focus for 2017-18 was to ensure that students engage in utilizing accountable talk prompts to ask questions and build upon each others ideas grounded in textual evidence. We partnered up with the Literacy Consultants Group to provide ELA support. The consultants followed a schedule that entailed providing out of classroom pedagogical support, push in-classroom support, and then debriefing with teachers to discuss the day's professional development. This year we will continue the instructional focus from the 2017-2018 school year. We are looking to get deeper and support our students with accountable tal, transference of knowledge and understanding the big idea of conceptual understanding. Lessons and unit plans will provide opportunities for instructional supports and independent practice, increase academic vocabulary and introduce students to multiple forms of texts on various levels of complexity appropriate to the grade level with the purpose of developing each student’s individual writing skills that support college and career readiness.” During the 2018-19 school year, we will implement a lead literacy teacher on the 2nd and 4th grade to continue the work from the Super Readers initiative. Teachers are expected to work collaboratively to utilize the strategies taught through the work with consultants, inter-visitation to develop standard based curriculum to ensure that all students have access to the curriculum. As we move into the 2018-2019 a school year, the school will continue to focus on writing and implement the TC writing curriculum with an emphasis on student discussion using Accountable talk. Students will engage in rich discussions supported by accountable talk and demonstrate the ability to read and write for a variety of purposes, audiences while connecting their learning to project-based learning experiences. How will you implement a standards-aligned curricula that meets the needs of your diverse learners, including ELLs and SWDs? Teachers in all grades have received and will continue to receive ongoing professional development related to differentiating lessons and units for all students. In the 2017-2018 the grade level pacing calendars were revised and uploaded into Google Docs.). Teachers have received training on differentiated instruction using resources from the iReady platform, and will continue to utilize these resources. Teachers will revise tasks to address Depth of Knowledge 2018-19 CEP-RISE 20  and increase rigor. Teacher teams utilized the NYC Scope and Sequence for Social Studies and Science and also elaborated on the topics that were in the ReadyGen Literacy program. Text and digital materials are continued to be used to identify resources that provide multiple points of entry for all students. Teacher will continue to expand their units and identify new materials that will be purchased using SIG and NYSTL funds. What is your vision for ensuring that all student have access to rigorous coursework that moves them towards career and college readiness? How will you support the personal and academic skills, habits, and behaviors needed for students to be career and college ready? As PS 328 continues to make academic progress, we will look for additional opportunities to develop in school and after school programs that will allow students to develop skills, habits, and behaviors that will allow them to become college and career ready. WE have established a strong school-wide in class technology based instructional program using the iReady platform as the centerpiece of the initiative. It is allowed teachers to digitally send students individualized lessons on their current level of performance in ELA and Math and monitor student performance while providing academic 1:1 support. Presently 328 has a strong STEM program in the upper grades and it is our vision to build a strong foundation by developing a STEM cluster position for the early grades to support this initiative. PS 328 is an inclusive school and all students, including SWDs and ENL are offered these opportunities. Our focus will continue to stress the use of technology embedded into all daily classroom instruction. How do you envision embedding the elements of culturally responsive instruction and how will you know that implementation is successful? Increase in student attendance Increase in class participation Decease in OORS reporting What is your vision for the use of a comprehensive assessment strategy (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, and summative) to drive curricular, instructional, and organizational decisions that impact student outcomes? For the 2018-19 school year, students will continue to be assessed using iReady/Ready assessments 3 times a year. Students will also be assessed using the Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment system every 8 weeks. Additionally, all students will complete the writing tasks as presented in the Teacher's College Writing Workshop program. These pieces will be scored using both the TC writer's checklist and a 4 point rubric. Writing scores will be tracked to ensure progress and support. The teacher will also be utilizing classroom assessments. Selected students in grades 1 and 2 will continue to receive Reading Recovery 1:1 reading support and the data from the assessments will also be considered. Math - All students will be assessed 3 times a year utilizing the iReady platform. Additionally, students will be assessed using the unit tests and performance tasks from GoMath. The administration and instructional team will meet to review the data and each teacher team will use the Data Wise protocol to identify areas of strength, concern and overall trends. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 21  Social Studies/Science - Teachers will continue to develop units of study related to the Passport to Social Studies DOE Program aligned to the NYC Scope and Sequence for Social Studies. Teachers will continue to develop units of study based on the DOE Scope and Sequence for Science. Each unit will culminate with a unit test and a writing task. How do you envision differentiating teacher professional learning opportunities to support instructional foci, meet students’ unique needs and advance culturally responsive education in your school? Teachers in all grades have received and will continue to receive ongoing professional development related to differentiating lessons and units for all students. Teacher teams utilized the NYC Scope and Sequence for Social Studies and Science and also elaborated on the topics that were in the ReadyGen Literacy program. Text and digital materials are continued to be used to identify resources that provide multiple points of entry for all students. Teacher will continue to expand their units and identify new materials that will be purchased using SIG and NYSTL funds Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By the end of June 2019, 90% of teachers will plan differentiated tasks with tiered questions to promote student discourse and engagement to yield a 10% increase in ELA and Math. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improved/A Average Math Profic - DOE benchmark 14-15 2.03 -RESULT 2.22 - Benchmark 15-16 2.18 RESULT 2.11, 16-17 2.23 Average ELA Profic.- DOE benchmark 14-15 2..00 RESULT 2.11 - Benchmark 15-16 2.15 RESULT 2.20, 16-17 2.30 n/a 2018-19 CEP-RISE 22 How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) iReady Data Ready DAta F & P Reading scores TC Writer's Workshop tasks Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Curriculum Development: N/A All students in grades PreK-5 September 2018– June 2019 Administration, instructional team, teachers and staff, CBO, Partners Fully develop standard based curriculum maps in literacy/math that incorporate instructional shifts and provide access for all students through multiple points of entry. Curriculum Maps will be modified based on student achievement results and feedback from SY 17-18 data. Explicit scaffolds and best practices will be added. Utilizing the Google platform to upload and work collaboratively. Utilize iReady, Ready, F& P and other data sources to analyze and drive instructional practices. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 23 All pedagogical and support staff N/A September Administration, N/A 2018-June 2019. ESL Teacher, Academic Support personnel, classroom teachers, CBO, Partners N/A All students in grades PreK-5 September 2018-June 2019 Administration, Special Education teachers, paraprofessionals, N/A Guidance and student support staff, CBO ELL Teacher Academic/Intervention Behavior Specialist. Reading Recovery Program to support 1st grade student with foundational skills. The Super Reader Professional Learning Initiative will introduce teachers at all professional levels to best practices in the teaching of reading, connecting social emotional learning frameworks to literacy learning, Implementing a STEM program which fosters problem solving, collaboration, and hands-on activities while they address real life issues. STEM proficient students are able to answer complex questions, investigate global issues, and develop solutions for challenges and real world problems while applying the rigor of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics content in a seamless fashion. STEM proficient students are logical thinkers, effective communicators and are technologically, scientifically, and mathematically 2018-19 CEP-RISE 24  literate. Through real-life STEM challenges and engaging physical and digital creation, students will develop 21st century skills through coding as they program solutions in a real-world context. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The Assistant Principal, will conduct a series of ELA/Math resource workshops for parents. Parent Coordinator will add a parents resource page to our schools website for help with homework and math lessons. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. SIG funding provides the following resources for this goal: 1 Coaches (1 x 1.0 FTE,) for literacy and math, 1 Early Childhood Literacy Coach - Central funding Partnerships: Literacy Support Systems, resources: iReady, Achieve 3000, Imagine Learning, Raz Kids, Starfall, MyOn, iReady and TC Writing initiative funding is provided by DOE Renewal Initiative. 40 Days per literacy consultant (2) Literacy Support Services. PSSG Funding: 2 teachers x 3 days x 35 weeks; Chess in the Schools allocation; LiteracySupport systems: This allocation will provide 175 sessions @ 1,200; Apple Computers (20) 2printers, 2 promethean Boards Scholastic Libraries as described above STEM Kits as desribed above Math Manipulatives as described above Super Reader Professional Learning Initiative $2,250 per day (with 3 rounds of workshops) x 27 days = $60,750 2 Admin days with 2 consultants = $9,000 2018-19 CEP-RISE 25  Lego-30 EV3 kits + Expansion kits; Item 316696706 EV3 Set w/ Charger V46 @ $376.05 TOTAL $11,281.50. African Drumming Starter Kit 1@ 160 Cubanito Starter Kit 1 @230 Middle Eastern Starter Kit 1@205 Sleigh Bells 3@33 Panyard Jumbie Jam Educators Steel Drum 4-Pack (2)@ 274 Rhythm Forest Kongas 1@380 Rhythm Ban Hand Drums 3@75 iReady School License Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 28, 2018, 50% of students will have demonstrated progress in literacy and math as evidenced by increased performance level/Lexile scores from the iReady ELA & Math Assessments. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. For the 2017-18 school year, all students K-5 will be assessed 3 times using the iReady platform as part of the Renewal Initiative. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. (aligned to Rise Key 4) 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. (aligned to Rise Key 4) 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. (aligned to Rise Key 5) 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. (aligned to Rise Key 5) x x x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 5. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? In the area of social and emotional development PS 328 is striving 2018-19 CEP-RISE 27  to ensure that we nurture our children through a consistent school wide relief that every child who walks through our doors are ours and we, every staff member, must support the needs of that child. We have 2018-19 CEP-RISE 28  also been very fortunate to be able to partner up with Morningside to support our vision. The Morningside program is a social emotional program which focuses on the whole child. Our school guidance counselor2018-19 CEP-RISE 29  , school psychologist and CBO partners up with teachers and administration and parents to use their expertise to support the needs of all students. In addition, social and emotional growth will be a prior2018-19 CEP-RISE 30  ity goal for our School Leadership Team (SLT). We will continue our partnership with Counseling in School during the 2018-2019 school year. Our CBO along with our guidance counselor, will all contributed to a 2018-19 CEP-RISE 31  more supportive social and emotional environment at PS 328. In 2018/2019 we will be introducing a Cloud 9 World program. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Supportive Environment What is your vision for a supportive school environment? How will you, in partnership with each CBO and families, enact your vision? In the area of social and emotional development PS 328 is striving to ensure that we nurture our children through a consistent school wide relief that every child who walks through our doors are ours and we, every staff member, must support the needs of that child. We have also been very fortunate to be able to partner up with Morningside to support our vision. The Morningside program is a social emotional program which focuses on the whole child. Our school guidance counselor, school psychologist and CBO partners up with teachers and administration and parents to use their expertise to support the needs of all students. In addition, social and emotional growth will be a priority goal for our School Leadership Team (SLT). 2018-19 CEP-RISE 32  We will continue our partnership with Counseling in School during the 2018-2019 school year. Our CBO along with our guidance counselor, will all contributed to a more supportive social and emotional environment at PS 328. In 2018/2019 we will be introducing a Cloud 9 World program. Describe your plan to implement a culture of trust and high expectations for teachers, students, families and community partners. Continuing considerable outreach to address the attendance concerns. The chronic absenteeism is primarily found in PreK and Kindergarten classes. Individual students and their families with recorded attendance and lateness issues have been targeted for support in this area. Additional outreach with temporary housing DOE personnel are included in the CBO program and specifically addressed with the Parent Coordinator. The attendance teacher, family workers, and administration are working with the DOE staff at the temporary housing sites to address attendance issues involving STHs. The CBO working in Collaboration with the School Attendance Team hold monthly student awards ceremonies and parties as incentives. The CBO meets the students each morning at arrival with music and students who come to school early receive a gold token coin and earn points that hey can later use to "buy" toys etc. Students with excellent attendance records are invited to special events and win large prizes such as skooters, printers, etc. Who are your CBO partners? How will each CBO sustain and support the social-emotional and academic growth of your students? CBO Partner CBO Focus Counseling In Schools Parent engagement activities, attendance, social, emotional and health supports for students and families. How will you, in partnership with your CBO, create a supportive and engaging environment for your students’ families? The administration,in collaboration with the CBO planned many incentives and rewards for students with excellent and improved attendance and lateness issues including a parent breakfast to celebrate the families of students with excellent attendance, additional lunch time activities, a student Hawaiian luau party, a trip to the LION KING on Broadway and a raffle for scooters, toys and games, books and other prizes. The CBO has also been instrumental in working with the Office of School Renewal and the Office of Community Schools to provide on-site dental and optical services for all students. Over 70 students received free eyeglasses this year. What essential questions, or key themes, will be explored by all staff and students that acknowledge and celebrate the culture and heritage of the student body? Attendance Behavior Habits of Mind What evidence will you use to gauge the impact of your plan to create a positive school environment? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 33  Parent surveys Work shop attendance Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Supportive Environment. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. June 2019, 100% of teacher will implement Cloud9 Social Emotional Learning Curriculum to build students sense of belonging and trust, yielding a 10% decrease in the number of level 3 and 4 infraction on the OORS rByeporting system. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve In the 2017-2018 school year, CBO will increase methods of outreach which will help to increase parent attendance for parent engagement activities. In the 2017-2018 school year, a letter will be sent home to every family describing services the CBO can offer in addition to a consent form to be returned to CBO that will allow CBO to work with students. CBO will provide as needed services and referrals with families. There has been an increase of >10% in parent attendance at workshops, PTA meetings and parent activities. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 34 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All students PreK-Grade 5 including SWD, ELL and STHs. Supportive Environment September 2018-June 2019 Rigorous Instruction Administration, classroom/cluster teachers, AIS providers, F status staff developer, coaches, CBO personnel, Guidance counselor, family worker, SBST How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) CBO on-going student and family outreach and support activities. CBO Workshops for parents, students and staff members Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Attendance Support Create and maintain a safe social/emotional learning environment for all students, by training staff to utilize additional social/emotional strategies and supports a CBO personnel will provide staff workshops and 1:1 support for staff members in providing social and emotional support for students and their families. CBO and student support personnel will develop partnerships to provide additional health and wellness programs, i.e. vision, dental, & mental health to support the needs of all students, including STH. CBO and school leaders will meet weekly with support staff to review and address attendance and lateness issues. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 35 Administration, Parent coordinator, guidance counselor, CBO personnel Identified at risk students and families including SWD, ELL and STHs. Supportive Environment September 2018-June 2019 Strong Family Community Ties Attendance at Saturday programs and parent worshops to increase parent involvement, student attendance and promote student achievement Parents/guardians of all students PreK – Grade 5 Strong Family Community Ties September 2018-June 2019 Administration, classroom/cluster teachers, support staff including guidance counselor, ESL teacher, parent coordinator, family workers, attendance liaison, CBO personnel, school nurse, SBST Increased parent involvement and engagement in school and community activities. Counseling in Schools will provide counseling and services to students and families during/after school and on Saturdays. Workshops will be provided to foster and increase parent outreach and support the school’s high ELL and former ELL students and Students in Temporary Housing population. Bilingual CBO personnel will address the needs of ELL and former ELL students. The school will continue to provide on-going communication with parents through translated documents and notices, the school curriculum newsletter, monthly calendars, parent engagement sessions and PTA meetings. PSSG will also provide 150 students/parents with tickets to a Broadway show. An additional PSSG allocation will provide the school with the ability to enhance school climate and culture through positive mindset branding. Posters and photographs of school stakeholders and activities will be created and displayed 2018-19 CEP-RISE 36 September 2018 – June 2019 Administration, classroom/cluster teachers, CBO personnel Students in Grades 1-5 including SWD and ELL students Collaborative teachers Rigorous instruction Administrators will monitor progress of students 3 x through iready assessment and monthly through writing and teacher created tests aligned to curriculum maps. around the school in order to promote a strong, engaging and supportive culture. Implement a comprehensive ELT Program that includes academic and social-emotional support as well as recreational activities: Expanded Learning Time – As part of the Renewal School Initiative, the staff voted (SBO) to adopt Model 5 for the Expanded Learning Time model. The school day will be lengthened from 2:20 – 3:35 T - F for all students in Grades K-5. Expanded Learning Time clubs for students in Grades 3-5 will begin in October for one hour on Fridays – 3:35-4:35 pm. Clubs include: Theatre Arts/Dance, Chorus, Chess and Math Games, Wrestling/Sports, Future Scientists (STEM), Technology, ESL Technology. Club programs foster social skills, and positive social and emotional opportunities. Identified students in grades 1-3 are included. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 37  SIG funding will also include Saturdays (9-12)– March/April prior to state tests (Grades 3-5) prior to state tests ). 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. CBO personnel will provide staff workshops and 1:1 support for staff members in providing social and emotional support for students and their families. Administration will assure that all teachers and staff are trained in SEL. Continue providing a strong, focused RTI/AIS program where DDI identifies student skill gaps and provides supports and services immediately to reduce student frustration and subsequent reactions. Redesign systems and structures regarding addressing attendance and lateness issues to increase attendance by 5% to meet benchmark. Additional effort will be placed on students and families in PreK-2 with attendance/lateness concerns including home visits conducted by the CBO, PC and Family worker. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. SIG funds are used to supplement ELT funds and support after school programs, test prep and enrichment Saturday programs in Jan-April and per session Friday club activities. DOE Renewal school funds provide the majority of the funding for ELT programs and CBO personnel and activities. Title III funds will support ESL programs. The CBO is funded through the Office of School Renewal and Community Schools. PSSG: 10 sessions @ 1200. Full day PD and/or job-embedded coaching from Morningside Turn-Key Sensory Room as described above Access Opera 250$ per class x 7 classes. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 38  All students in Grades K-5 will be assessed in Literacy using iReady. Based upon the data, and data from NYS ELA assessments, Fountas and Pinnell Level Testing and students who are performing below grade level will be monitored for additional academic support. Progress monitoring will occur every 8 weeks. Students in the lowest 1/3 will also be invited to attend the After School additional 3 hours on Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays from 3:35-4:35 and Saturday Academy for additional academic support. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. iReady (Curriculum Associates) on-line assessments ELA & Math for all students in Grades K-5 and Ready paper/pencil assessments (ELA and Math) for Grades 3-5 Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 39  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. (aligned to Rise Key 2) 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. (aligned to Rise Key 1) 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. (aligned to Rise Key 4) 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). (aligned to Rise Key 3) x x x x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review?  Teacher teams currently engage in analyzing Math Data but there is an evident disconnect between their findings and a successful implementation of data driven instruction. o A systematic approach needs to be developed to support a continuous Learning and Teaching Cycle around Mathematics Instruction. o Teachers teams struggle with the required next steps after the analysis and the creation of a concrete action plan that will support their findings. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Collaborative Teachers What is your vision for collaborative teaching?  Teachers will work collaboratively to ensure that curriculum maps and lesson plans have best practices such as UDL, differentiation, data driven small group instruction, SDI (as applicable) and based on the teacher’s student population.  Curriculum maps will be created by each grade level team reflecting and revising throughout the 2018 - 2019 school year. Curriculum maps will be standard based and a continuous living document.  All staff will receive ongoing PD around data driven instruction which will support the implementation and revision of the curriculum maps to include multiple entry points and scaffolds.  Teachers will receive/attend professional development and have multiple opportunities to work with staff developers and each other to guide math instruction and improve collaborative team teaching models. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 40  Desired CTT Models for mathematics instruction will include Parallel instruction (new concepts) and station teaching (data driven instruction).  Paraprofessionals will receive and attend professional development to enhance their role in the classroom.  Teachers, administrators and staff will work diligently to create inter-disciplinary tasks that will align with our  Mathematics, Literacy, Science, and Social Studies curriculum to the standards. Intra-visitations will support the collaboration and provide opportunities for teachers to apply best practices and receive feedback from their peers aligned to the Danielson Framework.  K-5 Teacher teams will have a dedicated 90 minute block during the week to meet and collaborate. How do you envision enhancing collaboration amongst your Instructional Leadership Team to improve teacher practices and student learning? ILT will receive professional development from ANet to improve teacher practices and student learning.   The ILT will meet weekly to progress monitor the school’s instructional goals  Members of the ILT will be given opportunities to turnkey information to the PLC. How do you envision collaboration within teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning?  During the 2018 -2019 academic school year, the teacher teams will meet at least one period per week to analyze student data.  Teachers will participate in Math inter-visitations and give each other targeted and actionable feedback in order to improve teacher practices and student learning.  Teacher teams will work together to share best practices, turn key information from off site professional development and work together to analyze student work. How do you envision collaboration across teacher teams to improve data driven teacher practices that result in improvement in student achievement? What data will teachers and the Instructional Leadership Team regularly review to ensure that they are reflecting upon needed adjustments to teaching practices and meeting individual student learning needs? Data Reviewed iReady Math/Math Ready Intent  Determine progress of students in grades K-5 to identify individual students’ area of  strengths and concerns and to utilize programs support features. Identify students strengths and weaknesses for students in grades 3-5 aligned to the NYS test blueprints Math Snapshot Assessments/Tracker  By analyzing this data, teachers will be able to group students based on specific CCLS and modify lessons to meet the needs of all learners. to identify patterns and trends within the subgroup. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 41 IEP Goals/ELLs  Teachers will continuously review IEP goals to ensure students are on track to achieve their goals. Teachers will modify their instructional lesson plans to meet individual student needs with the subgroup.  During teacher team meetings, teachers focus on the ELLsK-5 progress monitoring of student mastery for the Mathematics CCLS. Describe the screening process you use to identify students who need extra help? How do you use this process to determine which intervention to provide?  The school will use iREADY as a universal screener for Mathematics Instruction.-  All classroom teachers will utilize the the Snapshot Assessments and Tracker to isolate the CCLS and monitor individual student performance.  The structure of the Math Block will be designed to support data driven instruction and tier 1 intervention during the second period of instruction with differentiated centers and targeted small group instruction.  Tier 2 intervention provided to K-5 through AIS ( i.e. Do the Math) o  Pull out program designed to support students with developing math skills and build upon conceptual understanding.  AIS service providers will utilize the data from all formative and summative assessments to provide targeted instruction. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By June 2019, 90% of teachers will work in teacher teams to engage in the inquiry cycle around developing tiered questions and differentiated tasks. As evidenced by lesson plans and meeting agendas resulting in a 10% increase in the SPED and ENL population on the ELA and MATH State exam. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Based on the 2017 Framework for Great School Report, PS 328 scored above City average in Cultural Awareness, Quality of Professional Development, School Commitment, and Innovation.  Collaborative teaching  Rigorous Instruction o Math Performance 2018-19 CEP-RISE 42 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Time line What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) September 2018-June 2019 Administration, Data Specialist, .5 coach/Math teacher Classroom teachers, AIS/ESL/SETSS providers collaborative teachers Supportive environment Classroom teachers, AIS/ESL/ collaborative SETSS providers teachers September 2018-June 2019 Administration, Data Specialist, .5 coach supportive environment peer support for academic work How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) orogress monitor student work in ELA, math and writing through DATA WISE inquiry cycles progress monitoring of pedagogs through ADVANCE platform, inquiry team minutes and grade conferences. Logs of support from coaches Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Create dedicated Data Inquiry Blocks 1x per week to develop common assessments, analyze data and determine necessary curricular and pedagogical adjustments based on identified content and skill gaps, with a focus on Ells and SWD. Provide training on and implement the use of protocols to promote both vertical and horizontal team efficacy. SIG funding will provide a . Data Specialist/coach who will give instructional support for teachers in grades PreK-5. This coach will act as a Liaison between coaches, literacy support consultants. The coach will also provide additional training in using Google site for uploading/developing curriculum mapping, analyzing and incorporating data into the lesson and unit plans, creating authentic assessments and using available technology so that teachers can engage in a more sophisticated analysis and determine 2018-19 CEP-RISE 43  root causes of skill deficiency. Continue training on analyzing Ready and iReady data. PSSG Activity: 600 Hours This allocation is for teacher per-session for curriculum development. During this time teachers will work collaboratively to develop/refine curriculum aligned to the standards. This position is aligned to our school’s SIG plan and R/SCEP Framework area Collaborative Teachers. As part of the Renewal School Initiative, two classroom teachers will serve as Model Teachers and one teacher will serve as a Peer Collaboration coach to share best practices and lead inquiry work through inter-visitation and teacher led PD. Teacher leaders will share instructional strategies and classroom management strategies for teachers in need of additional support. A teacher study group using Teach Like A Champion will support instructional and procedural development. SIG funding will provide a per diem allocation for teachers to engage in inter-visitations and visits and debriefs to model classrooms. Classroom/cluster teachers, coaches, SETSS, AIS, ESL teachers collaborative teachers September 2018—June 2019 Lead teachers, coaches/staff developer, literacy consultants peer collaboration peer support for academic work ongoing meetings with model teachers and/or supervisor from Office of School Leadership to monitor and support work 2018-19 CEP-RISE 44  PSSG Activities: This allocation will be used to support an inter-visitation model for teacher improvement. Inter-visitation Protocol for Reciprocal Peer Mentoring is a teacher-facilitated, non-evaluative classroom visit focusing on the collaborative development of instructional knowledge and skills. During Peer Mentoring, a Host Teacher uses evidence from what students did (i.e., their work, questions, and discussions) to reflect upon his/her practice using the Framework for Teaching and identified professional learning goals. The Visiting Teacher uses evidence aligned to the Framework for Teaching to confirm the Host Teacher’s reflection and/or bring to light additional areas of strength and potential areas for growth. 19K328 will become a lab site for district-wide academic and student support initiatives in order to facilitate the sharing of best practices as well as to ensure cohesion between grade bands Pre-K-2, 3-5 and 6-8. During this time teachers will attend 4 sessions of PD in the following areas: Literacy, math, ICT/ELL support and Social Emotional Support Strategies. This position is 2018-19 CEP-RISE 45  aligned to our school’s SIG plan and R/SCEP Framework area Collaborative Teachers. Additional allocation will provide resources for a new professional development learning lProfessional Library Provide Professional Development to improve teacher practice: Teacher study groups utilizing the Understanding by Design will be developed to support unit/lesson planning and additional support in developing curriculum maps, identifying multiple points of entry, questioning and lesson plan development that focuses on elevating student discussion, use of academic language, the full development of scaffold questions and discussion strategies in math, literacy, social studies, science and the use of increasingly sophisticated Depth of Knowledge questions to increase rigor in lessons and assessments. Rigorous instruction Collaborative Teachers Supportive September 2018-June 2019 Administration, coaches, staff developer, literacy consultants, Special education instructional specialist, DOE and Renewal School personnel, CBO Environment vendors creation of yearly PD calendar to provide on going professional learning opportunities for teacher teams - both horizontal and vertical addressing academic social and emotional areas of focus 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Though a series of parent common core workshops. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP-RISE 46  Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. We will leverage our partnership with Counseling in Schools to provide additional support for teachers including strategies for addressing academic, social and emotional needs. We have a dedicated data specialist/coach funded through SIG An early childhood literacy coach will be provided through D. 19/DOE central. We will leverage our partnership with Literacy Support Services to provide PD on curriculum mapping, TC Writers Workshop, the use of protocols and how to make curriculum adjustments through data analysis. Funding from the NYC Renewal School Initiative will support Teacher Leader incentive PSSG: 12 sessions x 25 teachers = 300 days/ 5 teachers x 4 hours x 30 weeks for Curriculum Development/16 Saturdays x 6 hours x 25 teachers Saturday PD Initiative/Professional Library Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February, 2018 teachers in all grades will have collaboratively developed rigorous CCLS aligned units of study, utilzing Google docs platform including multiple points of entry, differentiated and scaffolded materials, assessments as measured by 2 units of study in ELA, math, social studies/literacy and science/literacy that include a DOK writing performance task that will be assessed using the TC Writer's workshop checklist and a CCLS aligned rubric. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The writing tasks will be assessed using the TC Writer's Workshop checklist and CCLS rubric and charted to monitor student performance and growth on a monthly basis. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 47  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). (aligned with Rise Key 2) Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. (aligned with Rise Key 6) 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. (aligned with Rise Key 1) 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). (aligned with Rise Keys 4 and 5) x x x x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Monday from 2:45 until 4PM to have grade level Data Team meetings. During the meetings, we will continue to use protocols for looking at student work, which are aligned to instructional practices. We will embed the lesson study structure in grade 2. In support of this effort, we have reorganized our instructional staff to best support the needs of our second grade students and teachers. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Effective School Leadership What is your vision for effective school leadership at your school? Through grade and faculty meetings, one to one staff conferences, SLT meetings, PTA and parent engagement activities emails and newsletters, the school leader will articulate a shared vision to all shareholders in the school community. The school leaders have received the Renewal School Benchmarks and Indicators and will continue to focus on meeting these benchmarks. The Administrators and CBO Renewal School Site Director will continue to meet to assess systems and structures in Community School implementation. The Administration and CBO will revise its action plan to improve parental involvement and how to insure the school is meeting the needs of all students. Monitoring of activities and outreach will continue to be reviewed and regularly scheduled meetings will be held to closely determine if the goals 2018-19 CEP-RISE 48  and expectations have been met. The roles of the CBO Director, Parent Coordinator, Family Workers, school aides and other out of classroom positions will be closely studied to adjust responsibilities and accountability for attendance, behavioral incidents, discipline, social and emotional supports and instructional practices. Information regarding structures, systems and accountability will be shared with the school community through the Community Engagement Team to build ownership and buy-in among all constituents. The administrators in collaboration with the instructional cabinet and teacher teams will develop and revise the pacing calendars and create a monthly Professional Learning schedule, addressing the needs of the staff and allowing horizontal and vertical teacher teams to collaborate regarding curriculum and instructional supports. During the 16-17 school year, a Professional Learning Cycle on developing supports and identifying strategies for differentiating for ELL and SWDs was developed, based upon needs determined as administrators collected and analyzed lesson plans across grade levels. The teacher leaders, ESL teacher and The over arching focus will be on how teachers are using the data to drive instruction. Lesson and unit plans will be reviewed and the presentation of the lessons, as evaluated by the elements in Domain 3 will be closely examined. Emphasis will be placed on development of critical thinking questions and the use of higher level vocabulary. School leaders will review these questions in the lesson plans and curriculum maps and observe the implementation of questioning strategies during classroom observations. The administrators will collaboratively develop monthly observations schedules and meet regularly to norm and review pedagogy and support for teacher effectiveness. School leaders will continue to support teacher effectiveness through the literacy consultants, math and literacy coaches, district and vendor PD support and individual Teacher Improvement Plans that focus on specific needs of identified teachers. Data Driven Instructional strategies will be closely monitored this year, supported by additional training so that teachers can engage in a more sophisticated analysis and determine root causes of skill deficiency. What are your core belief(s) for school improvement and how they inform your vision for developing instructional leadership at your school? All Professional Development opportunities reflect the vision and mission of the school. The administration regularly communicates with the staff during group meetings and through newsletters and emails. The school's mission in shared at the SLT, CST, School Success, SIT meetings, Grade conferences, UFT consultation meetings, PTA meetings and PLO workshops. School staff are consistently discussing and reflecting upon the extent to which we are fulfilling these guiding principles and working towards meeting our identified benchmarks. All correspondence from the NYC DOE Office of Renewal Schools and the NYSED are openly posted and shared with the entire school community. Extensive support from coaches insures that all academic work reflects the instructional focus - Writing - which has been collaboratively developed as a result of intense data analysis. The school leaders will continue to consult and collaborate with educational stakeholders about the school’s status and on the implementation of its Renewal and SIG plans. RSCEP implementation will be an agenda item for discussion in the monthly School Leadership Team meetings, the shared decision-making body of the school, along with weekly and monthly staff and Parent Teacher Association or other parent group meetings. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 49  What is your vision for developing differentiated leadership throughout your school? How will you utilize teacher leaders to build broad capacity within your school? The principal uses distributive leadership to achieve objectives and to ensure transparent and consistent communication with all stakeholders. Community engagement has improved as a result of the Community Based Organization's efforts and the SLT is consulted on all school matters. Students have advocacy as they feel comfortable approaching the principal with their needs and every students is known by name. The principal sends out regular communications via a newsletter and school calendar to the school community informing them of upcoming events affecting the school- both instructional and celebratory. School messenger is also utilized to inform parents/families of school events. The Data Specialist/coach, .5 coach, 2 Model Teachers and 2 administrative interns will have specific leadership roles including providing group and 1:1 support in implementing best practices with the goal of developing teacher capacity. Teachers are encouraged to participate in off-site professional development in order to turn-key strategies to colleagues. How will the leader foster collaborative school governance processes, and ensure full family participation together with other stakeholders? The collaborative leadership model that reflects the leader’s vision ensures that multiple stakeholders are involved in setting goals, monitoring progress, and managing action plans for improved outcomes. The school will utilize Community Engagement Team meetings for goal setting and reporting about progress. School-based staff will have opportunities to meet formally and informally with parents, staff from the CBO and other partner organizations to align action plans and pursue opportunities to collaboratively meet goals. All partner organizations will be required to organize their work streams under overarching Renewal and SIG goals and action items to ensure alignment of their work with intended outcomes of school stakeholders. Regular meetings will be scheduled where partner organizations and CBO staff have the opportunity to collaborate and share information with school leaders, parent leaders, staff leaders, and even students. Using benchmark goals, the school will be able to monitor and highlight progress that it is making throughout the course of the school year. How will you use evidence-based systems to ensure school and teacher leaders are led by a cycle of continuous learning and use this to inform their teams’ priorities? Evidence-Based System Support(s) Collaborator(s) iReady ELA and Math data instructional specialists will meet with teacher teams and 1:1 with teachers to review lesson/units and provide feedback including next steps. Logs of support will be reviewed by administration to ensure specific identified areas have been addressed and that feedback and recommendations from observations have been implemented. Coaches Model Teachers Instructional Support specialists Staff developer TC Writing Samples TC PD and Instructional Specialist Instructional Specialists 2018-19 CEP-RISE 50  Part 3 – Annual Goal TC instructors Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By the end of June 2019, school leaders will build the capacity of teacher leaders to facilitate professional learning around the gradual release model, tiered questions and differentiated tasks. As evidenced by a 10% increase on the NYC School survey questions pertaining to teacher leadership. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Survey ratings show that the PS 328 score for each component of Effective School Leadership is scored above city wide average for a total score of 4.01. n/a n/a 2018-19 CEP-RISE 51 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) September 2018-June 2019 Administrators coaches classroom teachers Teachers of students in subgroups, including SWDs, ELLs and former ELLS, and bottom 1/3 Collaborative Teachers Supportive Environment Effective School Leadership How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) A majority of students will improve writing skills by 1 level as measured by Teachers' College interim assessments. Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Teacher team inquiry meetings where stakeholders engage in inquiry practices such as assessment development, data analysis and the sharing of best practices with a focus on scaffolded questioning to support all students including Ells and SWD. Teachers will design data driven curriculum, including instructional shifts, increased questioning addressing DOK levels and discussion and utilize data from assessments that will increase student engagement . SIG funding will provide a Data Specialist who will act as a Liaison between teachers, the .5 Literacy coach, the F status staff developer and Literacy Support Services Consultants to ensure coordinated and cohesive delivery of professional development. This 2018-19 CEP-RISE 52  specialist will also provide PD, as well as monitor impact and accountability on how to use data to drive instruction. PD for stakeholders on the following topics: Ongoing assessment, developing CCLS DOK curriculum maps and performance tasks, using protocols for looking at student work, identifying root causes in skill gaps, designing DDI. Utilize CBO to provide advisory program to all students 1x week to support college and career readiness while teams meet. Hiring of an F-status teacher to provide instruction in order to provide time for teams to meet. Teachers, parents Rigorous Instruction September 2018-June 2019 Administrators, Data Specialist, .5 coach, CBO personnel. Assessment cycles - 3 times a year - Progress Monitoring All students Collaborative teachers September 2018-June 2019 Administrators, CBO staff Monitor CBO activities supporting students and families 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Through our open houses, parent conferences and community workshops we invite families to engage with our teachers and administration through out the year. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. CBO-Counseling in Schools, Coaches, Data Specialist, School leaders, F status staff developer, F-Status teacher Literacy Support Systems literacy consultants, teachers PSSG: F-Status supervisor Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA P/F Set-aside 21st Century C4E 2018-19 CEP-RISE 53  Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded X SIG Grant School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February, 2018, all stakeholders will be engaged in data analysis in order to promote whole school reform as measured by a 3% increase in the performance level of teachers in Domain 3b component of Danielson Framework –ADVANCE platform. School leaders will provide professional learning opportunities that focus on rigorous instruction, including DOK questioning and discussion strategies tied to the curriculum maps, data driven instructional adaptations and multiple points of entry. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress will be measured by the teacher's performance level as compiled in the ADVANCE platform. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 54  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. (aligned with Rise Key 2) 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. (aligned with Rise Key 4 and 6) 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. (aligned with Rise Key 5) 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. (aligned with Rise Key 3) x x x x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Part 1:  School Leader ensures that regular communication with school staff, CBO, students, and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. (aligned with Rise Key 2)  The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with CBO, family, and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. (aligned with Rise Keys 4 and 6)  The school community partners with families, CBO, and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas including academic, social, emotional, and developmental health to support student success. (aligned with Rise Key 5)  The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. (aligned with Rise Key 3)  Part 1b  Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOP’s selected above. 1. 2. In both the 2016-2017 and the 2018-2019 academic school years parent survey completions increased from 88% (2015-2016) to 99%. In 2016-2017, 93% of families responded positively to questions about strong school-community ties. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 55  3. On the 2016-2017 parent survey, 94% of parents say that school staff regularly communicates about how parents can help their child learn. 4. Currently, methods of communication include school messenger, individual phone calls, flyers/notices backpacked in addition to handed out during morning drop offs and afternoon dismissals.  5. Currently, every notice sent home is translated in Spanish to include our Spanish speaking families. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOP’s selected above. 1. All correspondence leaving the building must be translated in both Spanish and Arabic. The ESL teacher is available to provide assistance with Arabic translation through the DOE translation software and needs to be consulted each time correspondence to be sent home is produced. 2. Over half of parents (58%) reported they do not attend PTA meetings. As per parent reports handing out notifications about PTA meetings well in advance helps parents better prepare to attend. Also, having PTA meetings in different time slots can help ensure parents have options that can fit into their schedules. Further, having parents who are bi-lingual on the PTA can assist with the language barriers some families have to better inform parents of school activities. 3. Lastly, a stronger relationship is needed with community stakeholders and the Parent Coordinator. Serving 36% of an STH population, it is important to build and maintain relationships with family assistants at every NYC Shelter Housing Facility that the school serves.  Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 1. Getting notifications to parents in a timely fashion 2. Ensuring correspondence is in a language parents can understanding 3. Stronger relationship between parent coordinator and shelter liaisons  What data trends were used and what sources were analyzed 1. NYC DOE Parent Surveys 2. Parents reports via meetings, workshops, parent teacher conferences, counseling sessions, and resource fairs 3. New Visions Data Sorter Part 2 – Summative Vision for Strong Family and Community Ties What is your vision for strong family and community ties at your school? What opportunities exist for the school staff to know the students and their families in order to better communicate and partner with families and communities in the vision for the school? Part 2: Summative Vision for Strong Family and Community Ties What is your vision for strong family and community ties at your school? Strengthening parent awareness via online platform such as school website and school social media pages.   All staff (school, CBO) working in alignment with the vision administration has for the building  Parent Coordinator involved in all planning and being the face of family events in the building  Parents volunteering and assisting in all initiatives   PTA meetings at different times to include all families  Full PTA Board with bi-lingual board members Inviting in additional community stakeholders to work with parent coordinator and CBO to keep parents informed of resources in the community  Parent Coordinator and CBO Co-lead workshops, initiatives, and activities  CBO working with parent coordinator and school staff to build sustainability of school culture  CBO working in alignment with administration to foster improved school culture  Ensuring all correspondence being sent home in written in English, Spanish, Arabic, and any other home languages for current or incoming families. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 56   Strengthen the relationship between parent coordinator and the family assistants and DOE liaisons working at Temporary Housing Facilities. What opportunities exist for the school staff to know the students and their families in order to communicate and partner with families and communities in the vision for the school?  Parent Engagement Tuesdays  Parent Teacher Conferences  Workshops at the school, district, local shelters, and local CBO’s in the community  PTA Meetings  School and CBO led activities and initiatives o Community School Forum o Parent workshops o Carnival o Coat/Clothing Drive o School Wide Mental Health Initiatives o Spirit/School Culture Pep Rallies Within the Community School model, how will families be welcomed into the school and made a part of the school community? What support will administrators, teachers, school staff and school safety officers be given to help create a welcoming environment? Will there be a dedicated space for families in the school? Within the community school model, how will families be welcomed into the building and made part of the school community? What support will administrators, teachers, school staff, and school safety officers are given to help create a welcoming environment?  Parent coordinator will sit with parents and complete forms that address concerns as well as thoughts and ideas and follow up with parents about their concerns  CBO will assist parent coordinator with parent concerns/challenges and provide resources  All staff will make administration aware of parent concerns, using appropriate channels and protocols  Resources will be provided to parents by school staff or parents will be directed to resources in a timely fashion  Parents will be included/considered for input and participation in school-wide initiatives  Professional development room open to parents to receive job readiness training and resources/information How will the school identify and develop families to take leadership roles in school decision making/school governance structures? Fully functioning SLT team comprised of teachers, parent leaders, and PTA board members   Parents who active with the school community will be encouraged to take on leadership roles  Active parents who are bi-lingual will be encouraged to take on leadership roles  Active parents who express concern and interest in the school community will be encouraged to take on leadership roles  Active parents who are interested will receive internal and external training from the community outreach specialist via CBO  Resources will be provided to support parents in their leadership roles such as parent  Active parents will be encouraged to become class parents to keep parents informed of classroom activities How will the school engage the community and families? How will they ensure that teachers are able to learn from families about the children being taught?  Develop school wide system of teacher/parent outreach to include types of contact and logging outreach 2018-19 CEP-RISE 57   Teachers will take on an active role in reaching out to parents about concerns and also to inform parents that support is available to them via parent coordinator, CBO, guidance counselor, and school administration.  Teachers will discuss children holistically when talking to parents to gain more clarification/understanding to challenges that take place in the classroom.  Teachers working together by grade to develop PD’s to assist parent with homework and classwork.  Teacher will maximize parent engagement hours by developing different outreach initiatives such as newsletters, workshops, and homework help for parents  Teachers and school staff/CBO will work together to support families, which includes consulting guidance, school social worker, and CBO when having challenges in the classroom  CBO will work with ESL teacher to develop workshops in families’ home languages  School staff will take family history, cultural differences, and parent reports into consideration when working with students and their families.  Guidance counselor to be utilized when meeting with families to provide additional support. How do families partner with the school and CBO to support student success? Will there be dedicated space for families? Family Partnership with School:  Provide workshops in collaboration with CBO  Provide a day and time of engagement with teachers on a weekly basis  Address concerns  Provide resources  Work in collaboration with CBO to build sustainability Family Partnership with CBO  Provide workshops in collaboration with school staff  Provide counseling and support services on a scheduled basis  Address concerns of parents including challenges and providing resources  Work in collaboration with school staff to build sustainability Is there a dedicated space for these partnerships?  Parent Coordinator office  Guidance Counselor office  Guidance Suite  CBO Office  Auditorium  Professional development lab How will the school identify and develop families to take leadership roles in school decision making/school governance structures? How will the school identify and develop families to take leadership roles in school decision making/school governance structures? Fully functioning SLT team comprised of teachers, parent leaders, and PTA board members   Parents who active with the school community will be encouraged to take on leadership roles  Active parents who are bi-lingual will be encouraged to take on leadership roles  Active parents who express concern and interest in the school community will be encouraged to take on leadership roles 2018-19 CEP-RISE 58  Active parents who are interested will receive internal and external training from the community outreach specialist via CBO  Resources will be provided to support parents in their leadership roles such as parent  Active parents will be encouraged to become class parents to keep parents informed of classroom activities How will the school engage the community and families? How will they ensure that teachers are able to learn from families about the children being taught? How will the school engage the community and families? How will they ensure that teachers are able to learn from families about the children being taught?  Develop school wide system of teacher/parent outreach to include types of contact and logging outreach  Teachers will take on an active role in reaching out to parents about concerns and also to inform parents that support is available to them via parent coordinator, CBO, guidance counselor, and school administration.  Teachers will discuss children holistically when talking to parents to gain more clarification/understanding to challenges that take place in the classroom.  Teachers working together by grade to develop PD’s to assist parent with homework and classwork.  Teacher will maximize parent engagement hours by developing different outreach initiatives such as newsletters, workshops, and homework help for parents  Teachers and school staff/CBO will work together to support families, which includes consulting guidance, school social worker, and CBO when having challenges in the classroom  CBO will work with ESL teacher to develop workshops in families’ home languages  School staff will take family history, cultural differences, and parent reports into consideration when working with students and their families.  Guidance counselor to be utilized when meeting with families to provide additional support. Look fors’s schedule of workshop feedback forms increase of parents showing up to PTC and other workshops Who-PC CBO Admin progress monitoring quarterly 2018-19 CEP-RISE 59  How do families partner with the school and CBO to support student success? Will there be dedicated space for families? Family partnerships with school: Parents attend workshops and Tuesday engagement activities. DOE staff provide referrals for community resources as needed. Will is updating now Family partnerships with CBO: Parents receive counseling/support services either on a scheduled basis or at risk as needed. CBOpersonnel provide additional outreach services for families in need of specific services. Is there dedicated space for these partnerships? The CBOhas a dedicated space (room 101) for 1:1 parent intake and small group meetings. The staff lounge and auditorium are utilized for large group meetings. What data and student progress feedback loops will be present at the school to ensure that families knowledgeable of their children’s scholastic success, in addition to report cards? What data and student progress feedback loops will be present at the school to ensure that families are knowledgeable of their children’s scholastic success, in addition to report cards? iReady Usernames and Passwords for every family Student profile that include attendance data from the New Visions Data Sorter via the CBO/Attendance Teacher    Weekly reports from teachers during parent engagement hour Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. Part 3- Annual Goal By June 2019, the school in partnership with Counseling in Schools (CBO) will launch Parent Learning Center which will provide parents which resources and skills, empowering parents to lead in their community. As measured by pre and post school created surveys. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Based on the data from the Framework for Great Schools Report, the score for Outreach for Parents was equal to the city average of 94 and received an overall score of 3.50. Teacher-Parent Trust scored 94, one point below citywide average and and Parent Principal Trust, Teacher Principal and Teacher-Teacher trust all scored above citywide average 2018-19 CEP-RISE 60 n/a 2018-19 CEP-RISE 61 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Parents of all students including SWDS, ELL and STHs Strong Family Community Ties September 2017-June 2018 Parent Coordinator, Family Assistants, CBO Personnel How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Increased parent involvement and engagement through workshops, conferences and School Surveys Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. School personnel, including the Parent Coordinator, Family Assistants, guidance counselor and CBO personnel will provide additional parent outreach by holding workshops at the school and Temporary Housing Sites. Additional effort will be placed on methods of communication, i.e. notices, text messages, school messenger that will directly contact parents and guardians. PSSG Activities: 19K328 will become a lab site for district-wide academic and student support initiatives in order to facilitate the sharing of best practices as well as to ensure cohesion between grade bands Pre-K-2, 3-5 and 6-8. Parent Coordinator Initiative: Parent Coordinator 2018-19 CEP-RISE 62  Boot Camp: Implementing Effective Family Literacy Events: 2 days 30 participants @$10,000 The two-day Parent Coordinator Boot Camp provides parent coordinators and administrators with: An understanding of the research on family engagement and a deep dive on the essential elements of effective family engagement; An opportunity to engage in rich dialogue and interactive activities to better understand the role and responsibilities of the parent coordinator; Tools to self-assess current practice and to develop a yearlong action plan aligned to student learning; Communication templates to keep leadership, school staff and families updated on the work of the parent coordinator; Assistance planning a capacity building literacy event Literacy Event Learning Lab - Elementary and Secondary 2 days 30 participants @$10,000- Scholastic will model how to facilitate a capacity building literacy event for elementary families and middle school families using the practices and 2018-19 CEP-RISE 63  products discussed in the professional development session. Coordinators who feel comfortable co-facilitating will be invited to take on leadership roles during the event. Family literacy events are approx. 2 -hours. In order to provide both community engagement and academic enrichment to students and families, this allocation will allow the school to provide 94 Participants with an enrichment trip in May to Washington DC. TOUR FEATURES: 1night; Hampton Inn, Comfort Inn, Holiday Inn Express or similar - Surburban, DC; 1 Breakfast, 2 Lunches, 2 Dinners; Admissions: Arlington Cemetery, National Museum of African American History and Culture (Tour escorted by 4 professional Tour Guides for 2 days.) 4 - 56 passenger coaches included. 94 participants School will use additional funding sources to provide trip to additional participants. Personnel changes will result in additional staff who directly address the needs of ELL , SWD ELL, SWD and STH students/families Strong Family Community Ties September 2017-June 2018 Bilingual AIS provider, F status ESL teacher F status bilingual AIS provider 2018-19 CEP-RISE 64  and STH students. The administration has repositioned a staff member to utilize language skills to provide academic intervention strategies and student emotional supports With the adoption of the newly expanded school time schedule, the Parent Engagement time is now incorporated into the instructional portion of the school day. On the first Tuesday of the month, teachers will invite parents to a classroom activity, such as a read aloud story time, art project, homework help session to promote parent involvement. PTA meetings, assemblies, and specialized student/parent activities i.e. Science Fair, Art Show, Dance performance, will be publicized and more information regarding these activities will be directly sent to parents. Coaches will organize Family Math and Literacy nights. Parents Strong Family Community Ties September 2017-June 2018 School leaders, teachers All teachers, adminisitators, PC, CBO PTA President Parents Strong Family Community Ties September 2017-June 2018 Parent Coordinator,CBO personnel, teachers, school staff, school leaders All teachers, administrators, PC CBO Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. SIG funds will support parent workshops. Title I funds will support School Messenger, personnel changes and parent engagement activities. SIG Funds, Title III, DOE Renewal School funds and Title I funds will support Extended Learning Time activities. CBO personnel will work with DOE personnel to implement programs and workshops to address parent needs. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 65  PSSG: 2 2day workshops for Parent Coordinators/ Trip to Washington D>D> Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title I 1003(a) Title III X PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. School leaders will monitor parent engagement activities to assess outreach and parent participation. School leaders and PTA will provide additional funds to support parent activities. By February 2016, parent participation in school related activities including PTA meetings, parent workshops, assemblies, classroom engagement programs will increase 10% as evidenced by attendance sheets. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School personnel including the CBO will continue to survey parents to determine additional areas where the school can improve in the area of Strong Family Community Ties. Additional after school and Saturday activities will continue to be offered as well as parent workshops and engagement activities. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 66  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environments, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Goals for ELT should aligned to the Rise Benchmarks. How will the school will ensure that all students’ individual needs are served during the Rise ELT and how the school’s vision for ELT will impact both academic achievement and social emotional growth? Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. For the 2018-19 School year, 100% of students of grades K -2 will continue receive social and emotional instruction to strengthen their emotional intelligences and decision-making abilities. In grades 3-5 we will implement a hybrid program where student are able to participate in STEAM and a targeted intervention program. In grades K -2, as measured by a reduction of Level 1 and 2 infractions. In grades 3-5, as measured by a 10% increase in ELA and MATH state-wide assessments. Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? Voluntary X Compulsory Rise ELT – Describe what accountability structures the school will employ to ensure participation of all students, including special populations, will participate fully in Rise ELT. Additional ELT - If there is a voluntary ELT program in addition to the compulsory Rise ELT, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. All students are enrolled in the ELT program and parents of all students in Grades K-5 have been notified that this is a mandated program. ELT is optional for PreK students and in 2015-16, 21 out of 30 PreK students stayed for ELT time. All but 3 classroom teachers remained for ELT and the transition within the classrooms was seamless. Cluster and out of classroom teachers were assigned to the 3 classrooms to provide continuous instruction. Part 3 – ELT Program Description Target Population: The ELT program for a Rise School will be offered to all students in the school. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program: How will the school integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging? How will CBO staff and the school’s teachers be integrated to provide a seamless learning day?  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduces risk for retention or drop out, and increases the likelihood of graduation. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 67   Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  What new content areas and opportunities will be offered to students? How will the school ensure all IEP and language mandates are met during ELT?  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  How will community educators receive professional development? Are there plans to provide joint PD to school faculty and community partner staff?  What content will be led by pedagogical staff and what content will be led by CBO partners?  How will the school best utilize CBO partners to impact student achievement?  How will effective outreach be conducted to families?  How will programming be made easily accessible to students and families in order to encourage participation? Based on the NYC Renewal School Initiative the Expanded Learning Time model (Option 5) will include increasing the school’s instructional day from 2:20 – 3:35 Tuesday – Friday for all students in grades K-5 (mandatory). Teachers and staff will focus on 1:1 conferencing with students on reading and writing initiatives and small group instruction including use of technology and hands on experiences. The instructional focus is Writing in the Content areas and many resources have been identified and purchased to support student research in selected topics tied to the NYC Scope ane Sequence. Students in grades 1-5 will also have the opportunity to attend the After School Scholar’s Academy from 3:35-4:35 Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday. On Fridays, students in grades 2-5 will have the opportunity to participate in a Club Program (chess, theatre/dance, chorus, sports, STEM, technology, ESL, art) from 3:35-4:35. It is anticipated that the CBO will coordinate another Saturday program for students that focuses on enrichment activities, social and emotional supports and include parent involvement. In February-March of 2018 a Saturday Academy will be available to students in grades 3-5 for extra academic support and test sophistication. PSSG Activities: As students in 19K328 are predominantly level 1s and level 2s as assessed on NYS math and ELA exams, they are in need of additional support in the form of Extended Learning Time. In an effort to improve skill levels for all students, ELT will be expanded in include 1 hour before school each day, an addition 2 hours of ELT programming after school 5 days a week, a vacation program and an expansion of a Saturday program that will run for 20 weeks beginning in September. This addresses the school’s need to build capacity around student support, particularly for those students in need of academic intervention. This work will ensure that students are better prepared for a more rigorous, grade appropriate curriculum in school. Guidance counselor and Education Paraprofessionals (2) will be provided to ensure that student social emotional needs are addressed in addition to their academic needs. Counseling in Schools works in New York City public schools to strengthen children’s cognitive, social, and emotional development and academic achievement. They work with students at the highest risk of academic failure and dropout, and also support their families, teachers, principals, and surrounding communities. This allocation will provide enrichment ELT programming through Counseling in Schools in addition to the Renewal hour. Program will run Monday through Thursday from 9/11/17 - 6/21/18 After school groups: 3 to 5pm M,W,F = 2 classes; T,Th = 3 classes; Drumming, Yoga, Step Class, Dance, Art. The team will provide individual counseling in concert with case management services so that students and families have the resources they need to succeed in school and in life. Additional allocation will provide supplies. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 68  Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. How will the school assess the impact of ELT on individual student achievement and social emotional development? 2. 3. The lengthened instructional day will be implemented by the school leaders and PS 328 teaching staff. The CBO Director will assist the school leaders in supervision and monitoring of the ELT programs. The School Leaders will be responsible for the implementation of the After School Academy and Friday Club programs. The CBO will be responsible for the Saturday program. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. The increased instructional school day will begin on September 9, 2016and end on June 26, 2017. The After School Academy will begin on October 201 7 and end on April 2018. The Friday Club program will begin in October 2016 and end in June 2017. The dates and times of the Saturday program have will be determined in consultation with the CBO. Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. Regularly licensed teachers and school staff, CBO personnel, appropriate grade level materials and technology will be utilized to implement the ELT programs. The school schedule has been adjusted to meet the mandates of the NYC Renewal School initiative increased instructional time and was approved by an SBO vote by the UFT members. PSSG: Per session for Teachers/Supervisor/Ed Para (2)/Guidance Counselor/Secretary AM: 1 hour x 5 days x 3 teachers x 40 weeks= 600 hrs; PM: 2 hours x 5 days x x 40 weeks; Vacation: 6 hours x 4 days x 3 weeks + 1planning hour; Saturday: 4 hours x 1 day x 20 weeks. CIS ELT allocation- $74,600 PSSG will provide consumable supplies for Counseling In Schools programs Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. 21st Century Title I 1003(a) X Tax Levy X Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA X SIG Grant P/F Set-aside C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. School leaders will monitor the organization and implementation of the programs to ensure that all students are receiving appropriate instruction and support during expanded learning time activities. Classroom observations, work folders and assessments will be used to monitor progress. Daily attendance will be monitored daily and weekly and monthly attendance at various programs will be reviewed to ensure student involvement. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 69  All teachers involved in ELT will be observed twice during the school year to assure that the program is being implemented as designed. Writing tasks in social studies and science will be reviewed to determine student progress and achievement. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 70  Section 7: Community School Description Directions: The Community School strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – The Community School Program Goal(s) How is the Community School strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? How is the Community School strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes?  CBO staff push in to classrooms to address crises and work with teachers to address triggers and other challenges students may be facing that is impacting learning to support learning.  CBO works with teachers to develop positive behavior plans and incentives  CBO has developed a school store that is part of the schoolwide behavioral plan and the teachers work directly with CBO staff to give merits to children based on behavior such as: o Scholar Dollars o Snacks o Lunch with the Principal o Incentives such as sports equipment and craft sets  Academic Instruction Outcomes: Increased student presence in classrooms o o Less students leaving the classroom o Less disruption of student learning o Students better engaged with teacher and classroom lessons o Teachers able to engage and focus on student learning Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Indicate the summative goals   Staring September 2018, CBO will continue the morning coin incentives for grades K-5 to reach attendance benchmark for the 2018-2019 school year. Starting September 2018, CBO will develop an incentive plan for Pre-K and Kindergarten parents to meet attendance benchmark.  By June 2019, CBO in partnership with Assistant Principal will develop success mentoring program including school and CBO staff to meet attendance benchmark.  By June 2019, CBO in partnership with Administration will develop preventative program that addresses socio-emotional needs of school community to support.  CBO staff will have an active and consistent presence in the main office to address parent concerns. Please answer the following question as it relates to meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? Please answer the following question as it relates to meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal(s): 2018-19 CEP-RISE 71  How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)—in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health and Wellness—support your academic goals for students?  By addressing socio-emotional learning through interactive counseling, workshops, mental health initiatives, school-wide culture activities, and behavioral/attendance incentive programs, students will be better engaged in the classroom and classroom activities, which supports a learning environment. Part 2 – Community School Program Description Part 2a. Identify the CBO partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service Counseling In Schools all students/families parent engagement activities counseling services and referrals social services referrals and support social/emotional/health support services  Counseling Services- Individual, Group  Outreach and incentives to improve attendance Counseling In Schools   Students/Families with consent AND who are not mandated to services via an Individualized Educational Plan Students and Families at risk, or having chronic absenteeism as identified in the New Visions Data Sorter Counseling In Schools School Community: DOE staff, students, families, etc. Monthly Mental Health and Wellness Initiatives Counseling In Schools Parents of all students Provide workshops focused on instructional goals Provide incentives focused on attendance goals Part 2b. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. 2. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 72  3. 4. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. Part 2b. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Ensure needs are being met: Community School Director in partnership with school administration will continue to implement the needs assessment process to better serve the school community for the 2018-2019 school year. 2. Personalize support for every student: PS 328 school staff in partnership with CBO will personalize the needs of students through strategic programming by joining the community school team that will meet once a month. At this meeting, teachers, paraprofessionals, support staff, CBO staff, etc., will bring their strengths, challenges, and solutions to the table to ensure the needs of all students are being met at PS 328. School administration in partnership with the Community School Director will develop accountability tools to ensure all staff remain compliant to interventions that administration has set in place. 3. Develop a system that can work consistently: School staff in partnership with CBO staff will work to develop sustainability of initiatives and services in the school community. This will require active communication, support, and accountability of both school and CBO staff. 4. Ensure there is a true partnership with school staff and CBO: School Administration will continue to meet with Community School Director on a consistent basis to analyze trends in data and case-manage individual students as necessary. 5. Academic Support: CBO counselors support academic instruction by providing strategic mental health support via push-ins where mental health staff will help students regulate and learn to cope in the moment so they can return to receiving instruction. Teachers will be supported by being provided tools to support students with social and emotional challenges in the moment and in general to ensure the classroom is not fully disrupted and academic instruction can be taught. Teachers will utilize the tools provided and follow up with CBO counselors about additional tools and support as necessary to develop sustainability of classroom management. 6. Support for STH population CBO staff will continue to host workshops and provide resources at the shelters that service the PS 328 community in collaboration with DHS personnel. To build sustainability, the Parent Coordinator will also host workshops and provide resources in partnership with CBO staff to parents living in temporary housing. 7. Attendance: CBO staff will continue the morning coin initiative for the K-5th grade students. CBO will develop an incentive plan to target the parents of Pre-K and Kindergarten students. Administration will ensure the number of school staff increases to participate and play an active in the Success Mentoring Program. Community School Director will continue to host weekly attendance meetings with the support of Administration 8. Parent Engagement: 98% of parents completed the Parent School Survey in March 2018 based on outreach of CBO staff. To build sustainability, school staff will work in collaboration with CBO to make automated and personal phone calls, send correspondence home in the home languages of all families, and converse with parents during drop-off and pick-up to increase parent attendance at PTA meetings, workshops, Parent Teacher Conferences, the Community School Forum, and other community events/programs. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 73  Part 3 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 3a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students Part 3a Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 1. Counseling in Schools (Lead CBO) will support ELT by providing social and emotional activities prior to the start of ELT which will allow students to be present after their long day and acquire more knowledge that will be given by teachers during ELT. When students are able to focus with no distractions, they are better able to learn, attain, and display knowledge they receive. 2. Counseling in Schools (Lead CBO) will provide mental health programming via direct services, workshops, referrals, case management, and school wide monthly wellness initiatives. 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 1. School Staff, CBO Staff, Administration, Parents, Community Members 2. Meetings will be held once a month and will address the concerns of the school community. Accountably tools and practices will be put in place to ensure results. 3. Explain data strategies including use of the data sorter , and steps the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 1. School Administration will continue to have strategic data check-ins with Data Specialist and Community School Director to discuss trends with academics and attendance. Students will receive interventions based on their needs and progress will be followed up on during data check-ins. In addition, Community School Director will present attendance data weekly during attendance meetings so that appropriate interventions can be put in place to address attendance. Part 3b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program.  CBO room/office space  Resources in multiple languages  Translators  Technology/Supplies  Refreshments Part 3c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates.  September 2018-June 2019 Part 3d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this R-CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 74  Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) SRI, NYS ELA, Fountas and Pinell Scores Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Interactive writing, remedial reading Mathematics Go Math, Scantron Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) ReadyGen assmts, SRI, NYS test SRI, NYS ELA, Fountas and Pinell Scores Teacher recommendations, parent requests, students demonstrating need for services Skills/phonics practice Remedial review, reteaching, Interactive reading/writing using leveled texts, reteaching Interactive reading/writing using leveled texts, reteaching Counseling w/ Guid Coounselor or S.Worker/support – in school or referral to agency – NY Pyschotherapy, Brookdale Hospital, Kings County Hosp Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group, 1:1 During school day And expanded learning time Small group, 1:1 During school day Small group, 1:1 Small group, 1:1 Small group, 1:1 And expanded learning time During school day And expanded learning time During school day And expanded learning time During school day And expanded learning time 2018-19 CEP-RISE 75  Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Please identify the number of students in temporary housing who are currently attending your school. 1. There are currently 65 students in temporary housing. 2. There are currently 7 students doubled up. 3. There are currently 3 students in other temporary living situation. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 76  Workshops/Resources for parents via Counseling in Schools 1. One on one assistance and thorough follow up via office support staff with bussing/travel challenges 2. Social and emotional support via Counseling in Schools 3. Dental and vision services via the Office of Community Schools will be provided to all students, including STH students 4. STH students will be included in all academic and afterschool programs 5. Counseling in Schools to provide clothing and coat drives in which STH populations are always served first 6. Hygiene kits to be handed out at the local shelters via Counseling in Schools 7. Support with appointments and applying for services Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 CEP-RISE 77  Section 10: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. The addition of coaches, literacy consultants and a staff developer and supportive school leaders who provide high quality professional development in school, allow and encourage teachers to attend professional development opportunities outside of the school building and support teachers through the creation of the model teacher position enables 328 to retain highly qualified teachers. At present all but one teacher is highly qualified and teaching in their licenses area. This teacher is in the process of converting her license accordingly. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). School leaders have developed a year long professional development calendar to address the needs of all staff members. The addition of the full time and .5 coaches, 2 literacy consultants, and a staff developer have enabled the administration to provide high quality professional development for all staff members. Coaches and teachers have attended professional development sessions provided by the network, DOE central departments, private vendors and have had the opportunity to turnkey the information to appropriate staff. The administration All programs that were purchased i Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 2018-19 CEP-RISE 78  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). Day care programs have visited the school to introduce their students to our staff and toured the school building and classrooms. Parent/student orientation meetings will be held in August. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The MOSL committee selected NYC ELA Performance Tasks for grades K-5 and NYC Math Performance Tasks for Grades K-2. Scantron Math is used to assess grades 3-5. Scholastic Reading Inventory was selected by school leaders as a whole school literacy assessment and is administered 4 times a year – September, December, March and June. The Data Specialist meets with school leaders to review trends and data analysis. She meets with teacher teams and 1:1 with teachers to explain data and determine next steps. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (R-CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal 324,226.00 112,459.00 11,200.00 2018-19 CEP-RISE 79  Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Local 0 1,730,990.00 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/R-CEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the 2018-19 CEP-RISE 80  participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 81  Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current R-CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy  Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community at PS 328. PS 328 Phyllis Wheatley, in compliance with Section 1118 of the Title 1, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team (SLT), Parent Association (PTA), and Title 1 Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students PS 328 Phyllis Wheatley will support parents and families of Title 1 students by:  Providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology;  Providing parents with information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; Fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monito their child(ren)’s progress;  Providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State, and Federal standards and assessments;  Sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings, and other activities in a format and in home languages that parents can understand;  Providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills, and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members in the community Parental Involvement and School Quality 2018-19 CEP-RISE 82  Parental Involvement and School Quality The School’s Parent Involvement Policy is designed based upon a consistent ongoing careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title 1 parent to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of evaluations through school surveys, feedback forms, workshops, and parent meetings will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs’ of the parents and enhance the school’s Title 1 program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title 1 Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title 1 participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team (SLT) were consulted on the proposed Title 1 Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  Actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluate the effectiveness of the schools Title 1 Program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  Engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title 1 set aside funds, which are allocated  directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; Support school level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Teacher Association, the Community School Team, and the Title 1 Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development , especially in developing leadership skills;  Maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log events and activities that include copies of fliers in all home languages, programming, and parent signatures with contact information for each month and file a report with the central office;  Conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, love languages, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing, community and support services, and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home.  Provide opportunities for parents to help to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESEA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Accountability System, student proficiency levels, and Learning Environment Survey Report.  Host the required Annual Title 1 Parent Meeting n or before December 1, 2018 and every year subsequent to  advise parents of children participating in the Title 1 Program about the school’s Title 1 funded program(s), their righto be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title 1, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA); Schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning and evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions and let those suggestion be recorded in a binder to be edited and kept by the Parent Coordinator  Translate all critical documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed;  Conduct an Annual Title 1 Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their child’s academic skill needs and what parents can do to help 2018-19 CEP-RISE 83 Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement  The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 328, in compliance with Section 1118 of Title 1, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in programs funded by Title 1, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. PS 328 Phyllis Wheatley will provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum  Using academic learning time effectively to ensure all students are learning;  Respecting cultural, racial, and ethnic differences of every students at PS 328 Phyllis Wheatley;   Offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  Providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required Implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; by the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships 2018-19 CEP-RISE 84  Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; PS 328 Phyllis Wheatley will provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  Ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  Notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with the child’s teacher or other school staff member and meeting with school staff to ensure that procedure is universal;  Arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  Planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences PS 328nPhyllis Wheatley will provide general support to parents by:  Creating a safe, supportive, and effective learning community for students  Creating a safe, supportive, welcoming, and respectful environment for parents and guardians  Assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); 2018-19 CEP-RISE 85   Sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration, and partnering with all members of the school community; Supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents and guardians;   Ensuring that the Title 1 funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy  Advising parents and guardians of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title 1 requirement for Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA) and Title 1 programs; Parent/Guardian responsibilities of parents/guardians of students at PS 328 Phyllis Wheatley include: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  Monitoring my child’s attendance and ensuring that my child arrives to school on time as well as following the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child will be absent;  Ensuring that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age  Checking and assisting my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary;  Reading to my child and/or discussing what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes);   Promoting positive use of extracurricular time such as extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team Setting limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; sports and/or quality family time;  Encouraging my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;  Volunteering in my child’s school or assisting from my home as time permits;  Participating as appropriate in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  Communicating with my child’s teacher about educational needs and staying informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or the district;  Responding to surveys, feedback forms, and notices when requested;  Ensuring that there is always a reachable phone number for myself or a trusted contact to keep an open line of communication with the school at all times, especially in the event of an emergency;  Becoming involved in the development, implementation, evaluation, and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact.  Participating in or requesting training offered by the school, district, central, and/or State Education Department learning more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible;  Taking part in the school’s Parent-Teacher Association or serving to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title 1 Parent Committees, School or District Leaderships Teams; Sharing responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child;  Students of PS 328 Phyllis Wheatley will: III. Student Responsibilities  Attend school regularly and arrive on time;  Remain in class at all times unless permission is given by my teacher; Follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions;  Show respect for myself, other people, and property;   Try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully;  Always try my best to learn;  Talk to my teachers and other school staff when I am having trouble in class or resolving conflicts on my own; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 86  2018-19 CEP-RISE 87 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 23 2018-19 CEP-RISE 88  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Group One- 10 ELLs in grade 1 and 2 Group Two- 7 ELLS in grade 3, 4, and 5 Group One will meet once &nbsp;a week: Tuesday&nbsp;2:20- 3:35 pm&nbsp; Group Two will meet&nbsp;three times a week: Wednesday, Thursday, Friday 2:20-3:35 ENL parent engagement: the first Tuesday of each Month, 2:20-3:35&nbsp;pm Teacher&nbsp;planning time: Tuesdays 3:36-4:35 from 09/25/2018 to 06/18/2019 The program will begin on September 25, 2018 and end on June 21, 2019 with Begin description here: The Title III program at PS 328 will provide the ELLs with the opportunity to increase English language skills, academic language, and conversational English through the four modalities: listening, speaking, reading, and writing. As a Rise school the Title 111 program will meet during ELT (Extended Learning Time). Based on the analysis of the 2017 NYSESLAT, the preliminary results of 2018 NYSESLAT, NYS exams, and various formative assessments, the program will continue to target ELLs in grades 1-5 that perform at the Entering, Emerging, and Transitional levels. Subgroups and grade levels to be served: · (All are newcomers at Entering/Emerging per 2017 NYSESLAT and NYSITELL) · (3 Entering/ 4 Emerging) Schedule and duration: · · pm · · · approximate 90 sessions for Group Two and 39 sessions for Group One. Language of instruction The language of instruction will be English with native language support including bilingual dictionaries, online translating tools, student buddies, etc. Ms. B. Tian, who is dually certified in the Common Branches and ESL, will provide direct instruction to both groups. Materials · storytelling activities that help ELLs with English Language Acquisition, reading comprehension, and writing&nbsp; skills.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; · content, including activities, videos, songs, and games. It’s research-based, instructional differentiated, and motivating&nbsp; to use.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; · ELLs’ visual and auditory needs&nbsp;&nbsp; · The Language Power program- a research based&nbsp; language program&nbsp; and Imagine Learning-a language and literacy software program that features interactive iPads, laptops, and Smart board to access interactive content&nbsp; as well as meet Vocabulary cards 2018-19 CEP-RISE 89  Utilizing research-based language learning software in the classroom Classroom environment that support language learning Scaffolding &nbsp;strategies&nbsp; &nbsp; rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: The professional developments at PS 328 will focus on providing teachers with scaffolding and differentiated instructional strategies that support the language and academic needs of our ELLs. Ms.Tian, our ENL teacher will collaborate with our team of coaches to design PDs which enable teachers of ELLs to build the knowledge, strategies, and skills to integrate language development and differentiate instruction for the ELL population. Our team of coaches consists of highly qualified professionals and trained experts across content areas; Literacy Consultants- Ms. Maddy, Ms. Barnhouse, Ms. Ruzzier, Ms. Rayson, Ms. Davidson, Ms. Mills; Math Solutions, ORS Math Instructional Coach- Gabriella Cohen, and PS 328's Math and Science Coach- Ms. Mclean. Teachers will receive ongoing and continuous professional development at weekly grade meetings and during our weekly PD hours on Mondays from 2:20-3:35 pm. ENL PDs are as follows: · First two weeks in September · Sept 24, 2018 2:20-00 pm · Oct. 29, 2018 2:20-3:00pm · Dec. 11, 2018 2:20-3:00pm · Feb. 4, 2019 2:20-3:00 pm · March 18, 2019 2:20-3:00 pm · April 15 , 2019 2:20-3:00 pm · May 27, 2019 2:20-3:00 ( All dates above will be updated in September 2018.) Ms. Tian, the ENL teacher, will continue to receive mentoring and support from Myriam Augustine, an ESL Instructional Specialist from the RBERN ( NY Regional Bilingual Resource Education Network). During her monthly visits to our school, Ms. Augustin observes Ms. Tian's teaching and provides constructive feedback and and best strategies that support individual ELL students in their language and academic development. Ms. Tian, the ENL teacher for the Title III program will also attend PDs sponsored by the Brooklyn North District Support Center on a monthly basis. These trainings will be turn-keyed back to the staff at PS 328 and will have a direct impact on the development of academic language and content-area learning of our ENL students. All PD records including written materials, handouts, agendas, and attendance sheets are kept in chronological order in binders located in the main office. Academic Vocabulary strategies for ELLs&nbsp;and struggling students Supporting ELLs in writing Vocabulary in Math&nbsp; Accountable talk and ELLs Native language support&nbsp; in content areas 2018-19 CEP-RISE 90 Part C: Professional Development rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: Engaging with the parents of English Language Learners is essential to helping the students succeed. ELLs whose parents are actively involved in school or community-based activities are more likely to master the new language faster than their peers, gain better social skills, and make higher academic achievements. Parents of all ELLs, including those in the Title III program, will be invited to the monthly workshops for ENL parents. The costs for these workshops, including per session for the ENL teacher and the materials, will be covered by Title lll funding. Parent engagement time will also be utilized to help parents understand the data and assist their child with homework and academic assignments. Parents of ELLs will also be encouraged to attend workshops and annual conferences sponsored by DELLSS. The ENL teacher, Ms. Becky Tian, will facilitate these workshops on the first Tuesday of every month from 2:20-3:35 pm: · · · · · · · · · · Additionally, in collaboration with Counseling in School (a community-based organization), the school PTA and Parent Coordinator will help facilitate workshops throughout the school year for all parents including those of ELLs. These workshops will be at no cost to the Title lll Program. The schedule and topics that address the needs of all parents are as follows: · Facilitator-CIS, PTA, Parent Coordinator · Facilitator-CIS, · Facilitator- CIS, PTA, PC · Safety Facilitator:CIS, PTA, PC September 2018- How to help your child with Homework October 2018-Using technology to assist your child’s language development November 2018-Vocabulary games December&nbsp;2018-Benefits of being bilingual January 2019-Math games&nbsp; February 2019-Writing with my child March&nbsp;2019-Language learning apps&nbsp;for newcomer parents April&nbsp;2019-Cultural&nbsp;awareness May 2019-Connecting stories&nbsp;to art June 2019-Celebration September 2018 &nbsp;Dad Takes Your Child to School&nbsp; October 2018 9:00-10:00 idNYC&nbsp; Parent Workshop October 2018&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;9:00-10:00 Navigating PS 328 October 2018 (weekly)&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; 9:00-10:00&nbsp; Food 2018-19 CEP-RISE 91  December&nbsp;2018 (weekly) 9:00-11:00 am&nbsp; Food Safety November 2018 (3 sessions)&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;9:00-11:00 Job March 2019 &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;9:00-10:00 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities · Readiness/Resume Building Facilitator: CIS, PTA, PC · Provider/Facilitator: CIS, PTA, PC · Introduction to the NYSESLAT Facilitator: Ms. Becky Tian/ENL Teacher, CIS, PTA ( All dates will be updated in September 2018.) Parent Notification: About a week prior to a workshop, PS 328 will send home notices, flyers, and PTA calendars in both English and the parents’ preferred language. Parents will also be notified via direct contact, robot calls, telephone calls, email and mail. The following members will be available to provide translation services: Ms. Tupper, a teacher who is certified in bilingual education. Ms. Melindez, a bilingual paraprofessional, and five bilingual school aids/office assistants. Currently more than 40% of our students are Hispanic and efforts have been made to provide all materials in Spanish to assist with the parent/school communication. There is also one family that speaks Haitian Creole and a small percentage of families (>10%) who speak Arabic. The ENL teacher, Ms. Tian and classroom teachers provide translated materials for these parents through the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit. Over-the-phone interpretation is also available to parents during regular school hours. All records including agendas, attendance sheets, notifications, flyers, and parent calendars are kept in Room 120, the Parent Coordinator’s office. Copies of these records will also be kept in Room 202, the ENL teacher’s room. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ 0 Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 92  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ 0 Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 3. 4. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP-RISE 93  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 19 School Name Phillis Wheatley School Borough Brooklyn School Number 328 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Marie DesForges Coach Judith Mclean-Black ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Becky Tian Teacher/Subject Area Tichena Webster Teacher/Subject Area Kimesha Smith Related-Service Provider Howard Beedles -SETTS Superintendent Dr Thomas McBryde Jr. Assistant Principal Jabari Edwards Coach School Counselor Dawn Brown Parent Tameeka James Parent Coordinator Samone Stroman Field Support Center Staff Member Tatyana Ulubabova Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP-RISE 94  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 294 Total number of ELLs 40 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 13.61% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 3 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? ELA Formative Assessments ELA Embedded Curriculum Assessments Math Formative Assessments Math Embedded Curriculum Assessments SOCIAL STUDIES and SCIENCE 2018-19 CEP-RISE 95  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? ELA/Literacy F & P Running Records-Every classroom teacher is equipped with a Fountas & Pinnel (F&P) Benchmark Assessment Kit. Teachers conduct running records to each student individually three times a year to monitor student progress in reading accuracy and comprehension. By September 2018 all teachers will have moved away from Ready Gen and will be teaching the TC Reading Units of Study beginning with a TC Reading Assessment to determine reading levels and individual strengths and needs. All teachers will begin each TC Writing Unit with a baseline assessment (ie. on demand writing piece) to determine the individual strengths and needs of the students. K-2 teachers will administer end of Unit Assessments in Fundations to determine how to best support the individual students (ie. phonics, phonemic awareness, decoding, encoding, comprehension) All ELLs take iReady Diagnostics three times a year: September, January, and May. The initial assessments are administered in the school’s computer lab in September. The mid-year(January) and end-year assessments are taken in the classroom where every child completes the tests on a desktop or laptop computer. Individual and class reports are generated on the same day and teachers are informed if a student rushed through the test. The student is required to retake the test if the report indicates that the test was rushed, e.g., completed within 10 minutes. This ensures that the assessments provide valid results on student growth and individualized next steps for instruction Additionally, Entering and Emerging ELLs take Imagine Learning Assessments according their individualized Imagine Learning progress Teachers at 328 conduct other formative assessments embedded in daily class instruction using various tools and strategies. 2. Through one-on-one conferencing teachers assess All teachers will continue to assess student learning using differentiated Exit Tickets. Teachers design their own exit tickets with open-ended questions to assess what students have understood from the day’s lesson. With information obtained from exit tickets, teachers adjust instruction and plan how to best meet English Language Learners' needs by modifying and differentiating instruction. Math iReady Diagnostics-Students take iReady Diagnostics math assessments(online three times a year-the same time as ELA assessments. Individual and class reports are generated the same say the assessments are completed. It allows the teachers to plan, monitor and adjust instruction immediately after the assessments. Go Math assessments Prerequisite skills Inventory-Students respond to 24-40 multiple choice questions. The entry level assessment gives insight regarding student understanding of prerequisite skills needed for on-level curriculum. Beginning-of-Year, Middle-of-Year, End-of-Year assessments- these assessments highlight student growth, provide data for differentiating instruction and suggestions for intervention. Mid-chapter checkpoints and chapter tests help teachers monitor student understanding for particular chapters. Math Performance Tasks are administered three times during the school year. Each assessment contains several tasks to assess student application of what they have learned. These assessments are administered in small groups. SOCIAL STUDIES and SCIENCE 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? At the beginning of the school year, our school uses the NYSESLAT, and/or NYSITELL to determine the ENL Units of Study as per CR- 154-2 and create a schedule to provide Stand Alone and Integrated ENL services. In addition to the NYSESLAT level students scores from their NYS ELA and Math Exams, iReady Diagnostics, and prior year's 2018-19 CEP-RISE 96  F&P running records are analyzed to determine their instructional needs. The Response to Intervention (RTI) team, consisting two literacy consultants, one literacy coach, one math coach, the ENL teacher, Special Education Teacher Support Services (SETSS) specialist, and two intervention specialists, works collaboratively to identify students who perform below grade level and group them based on the data for specific academic interventions. Intensive, targeted instruction is provided to support students(i.e. small groups, Imagine Learning/iReady, Language Power for Entering and Emerging ELLs) Teachers use audio/visual aids, strong visual support, ENL strategies, co-teaching, scaffolding techniques, and graphic organizers to target language and specific skills in need of improvement. The team meets at weekly meetings to analyze and review current data to ensure student goals are being met. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Teachers at our school understand that it is a school-wide responsibility to use data to meet the needs of new language learners at various stages of language development. Within their Gen-Ed and Special Ed classrooms, and across the school, teachers collaborate to create the range of environments and contexts in which our ELLs will need to function successfully. The ENL teacher, Ms. Tian will: After administration reviews the EDAT (ELL Data Analysis Tool) Administration will ensure both ENL and classroom teachers implement the following during tier 1 instruction: Having bilingual dictionaries available to ELLs Teaching cognates explicitly Making connections between prior knowledge in first language and new information to be acquired in second language. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. NYS ELA and Math Exams 4th Grade NYS Science ExamNew York State Identification Test for English Language Learners (NYSITELL)NYSESLAT 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Currently, all teachers have access to the school's Assessment Data Folder on Google Drive. Our data specialist and coaches meets with teachers during grade meetings and weekly PD time-Mondays 2:20-3:40- to analyze test scores from State Exams and EDAT (ELL Data Analysis Tool) The team of coaches meet 1:1 with each teacher to review individual student data and class data, trends and patterns. Teachers work with their grade level colleagues to analyze disaggregated data and determine trends and gaps in student skills. In addition to the quantitative data that includes item skills analysis, teachers then analyze monthly TC (Teachers College) Writing Assessments, Fountas and Pinnell Running Records, iReady diagnostics, Imagine Learning Individualized Report, and GO math Unit Tests to determine class groupings and the need for curricular and pedagogical adjustments throughout the year. The team then also reviews attendance and progress monitoring data to determine which interventions are appropriate. This analysis will be used to create an Academic Intervention Service (AIS) schedule and target students who could benefit from additional help. Some ELLs will receive support during the school day, while others will receive support through either AIS or the Title III program during Extended Learning Time (ELT). Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 CEP-RISE 97  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. PS 328 offers both Standalone ENL and Integrated ENL. Our ENL teacher, Ms. Tian, is dually certified in both general education(K-6) and ESL(K-12). In Standalone ENL, ELLs receive instruction in English with home language support using glossaries and multi-media in their first language. Spanish books are also available in grades 3-5 to those who are literate in Spanish. In Integrated ENL, Ms. Tian, in collaboration with the ELA teacher, deliver instruction to ELLs using ENL methodologies and instructional strategies. In grades K-5, the Stand Alone sessions are conducted in a pull-out setting; in grades K-5 the Integrated ENL sessions will be either through a push-in model in the classroom or in a pullout setting depending on units of study. In the pull-out model, ELLs are first grouped by grade-band: K/1, 2/3, and 4/5. Within each group band, students are sub-grouped based on their language proficiency levels as reported in the most recent NYSESLAT/NYSITELL. Currently, there are five pull-out groups at our school: Kindergarten/First Grade = Kindergarten (5 Entering and 1 Expanding), First Grade 3 Entering, 2 Emerging, 1 Expanding Second Grade/ Third Grade= Second Grade (1 Emerging and 2 Transitional), Third grade (2 Entering) Third Grade= ? Expanding Third/ Fourth Grade= Third Grade ( ? Emerging , ? Transitioning) and Fourth Grade (EMrging, ? Transitioning) Fourth Grade/Fifth Grade= In the pull-out program, ELL students spend the entire day in an all-English content instructional setting and are brought together from various classes for integrated ENL/ELA area learning. In the push-in program, the ENL teacher works with small groups of ELLs during ELA instruction in collaboration with classroom teachers to provide integrated instruction in both language acquisition and ELA. In both models, the ENL teacher and classroom teachers align the instruction with the needs of the student based on the content area the students are working on and scaffold instruction to create a supportive environment for ELLs. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not applicable. c. DL program. If applicable. Not applicable. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? PS 328 offers Standalone ENL and Integrated ENL to our 40 English Language Learners. Ms. Tian, who is dually certified in general education(K-6) and ESL/ENL(K-12), provides ENL services in both pull-out and push-in settings. With a combination of the two settings, students at the Entering and Emerging levels receive 180 minutes of standalone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA each week;Transitional ELLs receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA and 90 minutes of integrated ENL in content areas( ELA, science, or social studies) weekly; Expanding ELLs 90 minutes of integrated ENL /ELA and another 90 minutes of integrated ELA or other content areas; Commanding level students (former ELLs) 90 minutes of integrated ELA, science, or social studies weekly. Our school does not offer HLA, however, the ENL teacher and classroom teachers 2018-19 CEP-RISE 98  consistently integrate home language support to ELLs in all programs. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Core content is delivered in English in all subjects/classes including Standalone and Integrated ENL/ELA. We emphasize differentiated instruction targeting student needs in both language acquisition and content learning towards meeting the Common Core standards. ELLs are given additional support when necessary in ELA, math and other content areas through small group instruction. Native language support is provided to ELLs through the use of bilingual dictionaries and Spanish text books (science and math). Newcomers are also paired with students who speak the same native language so that new students feel welcome, empowered, and ready to learn in the new environment. ELA instruction is delivered through both the push-in and pull-out model. In the pull-out model, our dually certified ENL teacher, Ms. Tian, provides instruction through integrated ELA. In the pushin model Ms. Tian co-teaches with the ELA teacher tp provide language support. In our ENL program, scaffolding plays an important role to make lessons comprehensible to ELLs. For each learning unit, whether it is ELA, science, or social studies, Ms. Tian carefully pre-selects vocabulary, mostly tier 2 or high-utility words to explicitly teach. Students build vocabulary knowledge in various scaffolding activities including vocabulary sort, 7-up sentences, four-corner vocabulary, and interactive vocabulary games on the smart board. We always incorporate videos and other media in English to expose all ELLs to the new language in various contexts; Entering and Emerging ELLs also have opportunities to explore multi-media in their native language to maximize understanding of content materials in science and social studies. Partner talk or accountable talk always follow video watching when our ELLs, usually quiet in the mainstream classrooms, actively ask and answer questions, or make comments about the topic presented in the videos. Students actively participate in these discussions while Ms. Tian serves as the facilitator by posing higher-order thinking questions using Bloom's Taxonomy. In the classrooms, ELA teachers present interactive lessons on smart boards, using charts, visuals, and other media to introduce vocabulary and key concepts and support the ELLs. Daily small group activities provide differentiated instruction that target the needs and reading skills of all students including ELLs. In math, Go Math is the core curriculum which includes a language support section in each unit. All lessons and interactive activities in Go Math are Common Core aligned and can be accessed online in both English and Spanish. Students have daily opportunities to acquire new mathematics concepts as well review old ones both at school and at home. In science, social studies, technology, and STEM teachers use a variety of hands-on materials, trade books, and technology to give students opportunities explore new concepts and topics. Throughout the school year, students take field trips that are aligned to content area units of study. These carefully planned field trips allow real-world application opportunities for what students learned in the classroom. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We evaluate Spanish speaking ELLs using the Spanish LAB-R during the initial registration however, home languages are not evaluated at PS 328. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a) Plans for SIFE students PS 328 does not have SIFE students this school year. The following is our plan for possible SIFE students: 2018-19 CEP-RISE 99  b) Plans for Newcomers: Newcomer ELLs receive 180 minutes of instruction in Standalone ENL where they engage in mostly speaking, listening, and general and academic vocabulary acquisition. Plans for newcomers in grades K-5 include c) Plans for developing ELLs: The majority of our developing ELLs scored at the Expanding level in speaking and Transitional in reading and writing on the NYSESLAT. Therefore, the goals for this group are to improve listening, reading comprehension, and writing in academic areas. In addition to our core ELA curriculum we use iReady and Imagine Leanring as an supplementary program for our ELA and math curriculum. Students take iReady Diagnostics three times during the school year. Based on the assessments and growth report, the ENL or classroom teacher assigns weekly lessons to each student. Students log into their account and work on target reading or math skills during small group time. The ENL teacher collaborates with the classroom teachers on a weekly basis, sometimes, 3-4 times a week, to discuss lesson pacing, students needs, and effective ELL strategies . In the pull-out program, developing ELLs engage in academic vocabulary study and close reading non fiction texts. They are encouraged to participate in accountable talk using academic language before producing responses in writing. This year we expect all developing ELLs to score at the Commanding Level or move one level up on the NYSESLAT as well as show growth on New York State ELA and Math Exams.d) Our school does not have long-term ELLs this year. If we have long term ELLs, we would provide differentiated instruction in small groups based on the areas of needs. The ENL service provider, AIS teacher, and school support team will develop an individualized plan for the student and monitor his/her progress weekly to see if short-term and long term goals are met.e) Formers ELLs who scored at the Commanding level on the NYSESLAT continue to be eligible for ELL testing accommodations and mandated 90 minutes per week as per CR-154-2 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Strategies Review directions Have students restate information in their own words Use of Graphic organizers, hands-on activities and manipulatives Incorporate film or video supplements Reword questions in simpler language Use concrete examples Define key vocabulary, multi-meaning words, and figurative language Teacher modeling Teamwork/Collaborative learning Explicit instruction Use questioning at various levels for clarification Engage students in cooperative/collaborative learning tasks Problem solving Differentiation Reteach concepts in small groups Multi-entry points Note-taking Visual support Native language support Exit Tickets Buddies Interactive technology-based activities MATERIALS: TC ELA Fundations Phonics program NYC Passport to Social Studies Go Math 2018-19 CEP-RISE 100  online programs/sites: iReady(ELA, math) brainpop.com Imagine Learning(literacy) ixl.com( ELA and math) coolmath(math) starfall.com ( literacy, math) 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELL-SWDs receive all services mandated on their IEP. The ENL teacher collaborates with the classroom teachers in order to communicate areas of needs and monitor student progress. All service providers including the speech teacher, SETSS specialist, OT, and ENL teacher, are given opportunities to familiarize themselves with students’ IEPs in order to help students achieve their goals through modifications and differentiated instruction. Data derived from both formative and summative assessments are also analyzed in order to help students achieve their IEP goals to provide appropriate supports. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Title III during ELT (Extended Learning Time) 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Training on how to implement the TC Reading Units of StudyENL professional development to support classroom teachersENL Materials (ie. bilingual picture dictionaries, puppetsENL parent engagement activitiesMultilingual Communication Tool for Parents (ie. School CNXT Software) 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Not applicable. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. During the school day every student, including ELLs and SWDs is afforded equal access to all school programs The purpose of these programs is to provide students with opportunities to enhance language, literacy, and writing skills to meet the rigorous demands of Common Core Standards. During ELT select ELLs receive support through a Title III program During the after school program students receive extra support in core subjects. The CBO, Counseling in School, provides on-site programs to support students' social and emotional development. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Fundations Phonics program (K-2) Wilson Phonics Program (3-4) Blue Star Education Reading Comprehension and Writing Response (Gr 2-3) Rigby Guided Reading Program (K-5) 2018-19 CEP-RISE 101  Scholastic Guided Reading program Scholastic Non fiction Reading Series NYC Passport to Social Studies Social Studies and Science text books Science Lab and projects Computer Lab Go Math online programs/sites: iReady(ELA, math) brainpop.com(science) Imagine Learning(literacy) ixl.com( ELA and math) coolmath(math starfall.com (ELA and Math) 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In our Freestanding ENL, the school determines which home Language supports are appropriate for ELLs. The following supports are provided for in class learning and test taking: Teachers assess the home language supports by 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. For students in K-2 we use large prints, pictures, manipulatives, audio/visual aids, rhymes, art projects and various hands-on materials. Every student is equipped with an electronic device, (ie. ipads, laptops, and desktop computers). Students have access to technology based resources such as; Starfall, PBS for Kids, iReady and Imagine Learning to support early literacy and content instruction. For students in 3-5 we use pictures, Reader's Theater, create Smartboard interactivegames, manipulatives, audio/visual aids, rhymes, art projects and various hands-on materials. Every student is equipped with an electronic device, (ie. ipads, laptops, and desktop computers). Students have access to technology based resources such as; PBS for Kids, iReady and Imagine Learning to support early literacy and content instruction. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our school shares the building with HYDE LEADERSHIP Charter School. Each school uses two floors within the school building, and shares common space, such as the cafeteria, auditorium, gymnasium and school yard. The administrators and leader teams communicate regularly throughout the year to ensure students in both schools are provided with a quality education in a safe and academically engaging environment. At the monthly collaboration meetings, the leader teams review safety procedures, shared resources(library, equipment,etc), and resolve issues and concerns raised by either party. Both schools adjusted their school hours to avoid arrival and dismissal traffic: Charter School's hours are 7:30 am to 4:00pm ; PS 328 8:00am to 3:35 pm. During fire drills, classes exit the building in single files to allow all classes from both schools exit safely and quickly. Teachers also informally exchange ideas and information to improve the quality of instruction and bring out the best in student achievement. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). 2018-19 CEP-RISE 102  At the time of pre-registration the Parent Coordinator, the guidance counselor, the ENL teacher and pre-K teachers work with families of potential kindergarten students by advising them of the best program for enrollment. The team works with the families to help them become more familiar with our Freestanding ENL program and the curriculum offered in Kindergarten. Throughout the school year, new ELLs are invited to participate in all academic and supporting programs offered at PS 328. Examples of such activities include Dance Theater, school assemblies, Friday clubs, Extended Learning Time, Title III After school, and the end-of-year prom sponsored by the PTA. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Not applicable. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not applicable. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? SY 17-18 Our school based Math coach, a DOE Literacy Coach and four outside literacy consultants each provide Professional Development to all teachers at PS 328 during the 80 minutes of PLO(Professional Learning Offerings) on Mondays Ms. Tian attended Professional Development outside of school 4 times a year Ms. Tian participates in the District 19 ENL Study Group with a focus on ENL strategies and compliance. Ms. Tian continues to receive one on one coaching opportunities in-house that directly address rigorous instruction, including questioning, a heightened focus on content areas (social studies and science literacy) and additional training 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. PS 328 provides professional development to all teachers and administrators that address the needs of English Language learners. The in-house PDs and trainings described in question 1 consist of 15% of the PD hours that are dedicated to best practices for teaching language and content to ELL students. The ENL teacher, Ms. Tian attends PDs both in school and those sponsored by DOE and other educational organizations and is responsible for turnkeying information to her colleagues. 50% of those PDs focus on best practices for integrating language and content instruction for ELLs across all content areas. All sign in sheets and agendas are maintained in the main office by administration. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 103  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The ENL teacher provides annual individual meetings to parents of ELLs during Parental Engagement Time on Tuesdays or when parents are available. She also communicates on the phone with those parents who cannot attend meetings in person during regular school hours. During these meetings, parents are informed of their child's progress in language and content learning; areas of concerns are also addressed and specific plans for improvement are explained to the parents. Whenever possible, classroom teachers, paraprofessionals, and support staff attend these meetings to provide parents with more information and resources. School bilingual staff are always available to translate for those who are limited in English. Records of all annual meetings are maintained by Ms. Tian. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. During SY 17-18 parents of ELLs at PS 328 were provided with numerous opportunities to participate in school activities. In collaboration with the CBO, Counseling in Schools, our Parent Coordinator, Ms. Stroman, and the PTA conducted weekly parent workshops focusing on parenting skills and communication between school and community. In addition, Parent Engagement Time is scheduled every Tuesday from 2:20 to 3:35 PM when parents are invited to classrooms to participate in various activities such as art, technology, reading, math games, and homework help. Over time there has been an increase in parent participation and active involvement in their child's education. Throughout the year, parents were also invited to various school-wide assemblies including Fall Celebration, Winter Celebration, Spring Assembly, End-year Dance Performance, and others. ENL teacher Ms. Tian partnered with the CBO, Counseling in Schools to provide a parent workshop to support parents in getting their children ready to take the NYSESLAT. Ms. Tian also collaborated with the PTA to provide a parent workshop to support parents on using iPads and iPad apps. ELL parent involvement on SLT????? During SY 18-19 parents of ELLs at PS 328 will be provided with numerous opportunities to participate in school activities. In collaboration with the CBO, Counseling in Schools, our Parent Coordinator, Ms. Stroman, and the PTA will conduct weekly parent workshops focusing on parenting skills and communication between school and community. In addition, Parent Engagement Time will be scheduled every Tuesday from 2:20 to 3:35 PM. Ms. Tian will provide Parent Workshops as part of the Title III program every first Tuesday of the month. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP-RISE 104  2018-19 CEP-RISE 105 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Barbra Gedacht, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 106  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: 19 School DBN: 19K328 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Marie DesForges Title Principal Morgan Peaceman Assistant Principal Samone Stroman Parent Coordinator Becky Tian ENL/Bilingual Teacher Tameeka James Parent Tichena Webster Teacher/Subject Area Howard Beedles Teacher/Subject Area Judith Mclean-Black Coach Coach Dawn Brown School Counselor Thomas McBryde Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 2018-19 CEP-RISE 107  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 19 School Name: Phyllis Wheatley Superintendent: Thomas McBryde The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Becky Tian ENL Teacher Yes yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. When parents or guardians first register their child at PS 328, their registration package includes the Home Language Identification Survey. A trained pedagogue is present to assist the parents to fill out the HLIS. At the completion of the registration, the child’s home language is determined to be either English or another language. Part III of the HLIS indicates the parent’s preferred language of communication. Other ways to determine the parent’s preferred language of communication is ATS reports, blue Emergency Contact Cards, and conversations with parents at PTA meetings and parent-teacher conferences. Languages other than English spoken by our parents are Spanish and Arabic. One parent speaks but not reads Haitian Creole. Some Spanish-speaking parents prefer written and spoken communication in both English and Spanish. Others prefer English since they only speak but do not read the language. Our Arabic parents accept written communication in English and Arabic or in English only due to the reason that they always come to school with someone who is bilingual in English and Arabic to translate for them. Most Arabic Speaking families have at least one member who speaks and reads 2018-19 CEP-RISE 108  English. Therefore, they can communicate with the school in either language. Parents of other languages prefer written and spoken communication in both languages. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic Haitian Creole English Spanish 14 1 195 46 5.45 0.39 75.88 17.9 14 1 195 46 5.45 0.39 75.88 17.9 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Newsletters, Parent Calendars Monthly Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. School bilingual staff translate newsletters and calendars that are distributed to parents at the beginning of the month. Translated by school bilingual staff 4 times a year: September, November, March, May October of the school year Translated by school bilingual staff Parent-Teacher conference announcements After-school program parent choice form Title I letters, Fire drill and lock downs September Translated documents are downloaded from the DOE Intranet 2018-19 CEP-RISE 109  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide September, November, March, May Parent-teacher conferences Parent workshops Monthly from September to June Parent engagement in the classroom Tuesdays 2:20-3:35 September-June School assemblies November, December, June interpretation service(s)? The CBO, Counseling in School, has four staff members to provide interpretation services for Spanish-speaking parents. Our Arabic-speaking parents always come to meetings with relatives who speak both English and Arabic to help them. The school also hires interpreters to help parents during PT conferences. The CBO, bilingual teachers, paraprofessional, school aids, and parent volunteers will provide interpretation services. The CBO, bilingual teachers, paraprofessional, school aids, and parent volunteers will provide interpretation services. The CBO, bilingual teachers, paraprofessional, school aids, and parent volunteers will provide interpretation services. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Every student has the Blue Emergency Contact Card on file in the school office as well as with the classroom teacher. Listed on the card are parents'' or guardians' names and contact phone #s; other immediate adult family members' names and contact #; parents' preferred language. In the event of a school emergency, the school will contact the parents via phone in their preferred language. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 110  At the beginning of the school year, the school will provide training to all staff members on the requirements of CR A-663. Resources are downloaded from the DOE Intranet and made available to teachers, Parent Coordinator, and school safety agents. Available resources are: Trip slips Letters to ENL parents, Letters for emergency readiness/lock downs Translation request form Directions for how to use over-the-phone interpretation(number to call, school DBN 19K328) Parent language cards Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) At the beginning of the school year, the school distribute to all parents a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities, which includes their rights for translation and interpretation services from the DOE. Parents of ELLs also receive the document in their preferred language, downloaded from the DOE Intranet. The language poster is displayed at the entrance with the point person's name and contact information. At school-wide PTA meetings, parent-teacher conferences, one to one meetings, and other forms of conversations, teachers and administrators always remind parents of their rights to receive information in their preferred language regarding their child's education. The following is is a list of materials we provide parents in both English and covered languages: Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities Pamphlets for ENL parents-How to Get Involved, etc Student Progress Report Newsletters 2018-19 CEP-RISE 111  Monthly Calendars/Upcoming Parent Workshops and School Events Trip Slips Fire Drills/Lock Downs Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from limited-English-proficient parents on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? PS 328 will follow the procedures outlines on the Translation and Interpretation Unit website in order to meet the translation and interpretation requirements set forth in the Chancellor’s Regulations A-663. Parent feedback will be gathered through Parent Surveys as well as daily communication between school and parents. The majority of our parents pick up their children at dismissal time and teachers are able to communicate with parents regularly and address any concerns and feedback in a timely fashion. This year, we have increased use of over-the-phone interpretation services to communicate with Arabic parents. (Bilingual staff members provide translation and interpretation to Spanish-speaking parents. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 112 
