 21K329 School Name: P.S. 329 SURFSIDE Principal: SALEMA MARBURY   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information PS 329 21K329 School Number (DBN): 21K329 Pre K through Grade 5 2929 West 30th Street Brooklyn, NY 11224 718-787-3460 Phone Number: Fax: 718-787-3471 Fax: Salema Marbury smarbury@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 21 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Salema Marbury Lance Schatzman Erica Flores Lance Schaztman CelicaCamarena tba tba District Information Isabel Dimola Superintendent: 1401 Emmons Avenue, Room 101 idimola@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-648-0209 Phone Number: 718-648-2165 Fax: Brooklyn South FSC: Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 415 89th Street, Brooklyn, NY 11209 mdegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718) 759-4862 Phone Number: 718-759-4842 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Salema Marbury Lance Schatzman Erica Flores CelicaCamarena Tina Murlin Ingrid Blumberg Rosemary Madera *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Staff Member/Staff Member/Staff   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) CelicaCamarena GeneanPerine Melissa Fyffe Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission Statement Section 4: CEP Overview The PS 329 Family is committed to empowering young people to believe in themselves. We promote excellence within our students by setting high standards, nurturing their talents and encouraging creativity. We inspire the leaders of tomorrow.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. As a school community we communicate a culture of high expectations for all students and staff. We apply a systematic approach to motivate our students as well as communicate their achievement towards meeting the standards while promoting college and career readiness. Our expectations are communicated as follows: School wide and grade aligned mantras (EMPOWER) are regularly articulated among and across grades outlining expectations and core values for our school community. These expectations are embedded in students’ daily activities and expectations. And were established in conjunction with school leaders, staff and School Leadership Team. The school-wide behavior management and classroom management protocol are aligned to our mantra and specifically outline the appropriate behaviors of students and the designated classroom management behaviors of staff. This helps set our school up for success with supporting students in meeting the common core learning standards We articulate our shared school vision and mission through our staff handbook and our ongoing mandates, expectations and initiatives to students, staff and parents through our school website, classroom practices and school-wide activities. Parents are engaged through Parent Involvement Surveys where parents have the opportunity to communicate their needs as school partners. This involves them in the decision making process regarding parent workshops and initiatives provided throughout the school year. We design ongoing family-centered workshops and events aligned to parent needs. Collaborations with Change For Kids, Lutheran Family Services, Food Bank , the YMCA and the YWCA allow us to offer a wealth of services, above and beyond workshops, to help families with their specific needs. We provide ongoing communication with our families to ensure they are aware of their child’s progress. We prepare and distribute monthly student progress reports indicating students’ academic performance, college and career readiness including academic and social strengths/struggles and next steps. Ongoing communication is maintained with our parents with respect to academic information and resources, current events , school-wide initiative and extracurricular activities and shared via www.ps 329.schoolwires.com. Students engage in academic and life skills goal setting, throughout the school year. These goals all aligned to the CCLS and College and Career readiness development. The goals and progress towards achieving the goals are shared with parent three times throughout the school year. This includes at home strategies parents may utilize to assist their child with achieving these goals. Students’ social and emotional growth is supported through our partnership with Positive Learning Collaborartive and Lutheran Family Services. Life skills Benchmarks are utilized to monitor students’ college and career readiness skills. The life skills benchmarks measure the college and career readiness not addressed in the common core learning standards. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our special student population includes students who are Learning Disabled . These students need smaller class settings, differentiated instruction, speech and, occupational and pysical therapy. Some of our students are assigned crisis management paraprofessionals and/or health paraprofessionals. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 0  The practices and initiatives described in this Overview assisted PS 329 with achieving great progress in the area of Supportive Environment and Rigorous Instruction. Students and Teachers are supportive of each other, students are highly motivated, and teachers utilize a multitude of strategies to encourage students to strive for excellence academically, socially and emotionally... Next year, our key areas of focus will be Effective School Leadership and Strong Family and Community Ties. administrators will spearhead various instructional initiatives and partner with parents and community organizations to improve student attendance. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 21K329 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 414 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 71 71 22 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 11 11 22 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 96.0% % Attendance Rate 91.5% % Reduced Lunch 4.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.5% 28.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 5.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 10.1 0% 15% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 23.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 81% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 17 19 88.1% 3.4% 26.1% 59.4% 6.0% 0.7% 4 3% 6.9 18.4% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our core belief is that when teachers plan reflectively, utilize various strategies to maximize their students' intellectual engagement and encourage students to regularly engaged in quality conversations aligned to the content, then ultimately, students will develop critical thinking skills, build academic vocabulary and develop a deep understanding of the concepts. Data Analysis of Needs: * As per June 2018 F & P Reading Assessments, 40% of students in kindergarten through Grade 5 are reading at proficiency level. *The number of students scoring grade level proficiency is 23.7% as per the 2018 NYS ELA Exam. AS Per our 2017 QR: *Curricular documents reflect common essential elements that reference learning objectives, the Common Core Learning Standards, instructional practices, and assessment of student learning. The school focuses on the instructional shift of students having opportunities to cite evidence to support their thinking in both math and ELA. Lessons and units focus primarily on students text-based responses with a balance of non-fiction and fiction text through the Teachers College Writing Reading Program and GO Math!. Similarly, for math, the school focused on operations and algebraic thinking as well as students being able to develop and deepen their conceptual understanding of complex mathematical concepts. For example, all written lessons include a section that helps to have students consider how math topics are related and feature strategy work instead of procedural equations. In other written documents, there were opportunities for producing clear and coherent writing appropriate to task and drawing evidence from literary information to support analysis, reflection, research, and academic vocabulary. In one plan, students had to interpret multiplication equations as a comparison, solve multi-step word problems with whole numbers using three operations, and assess reasonable answers using mental math and estimating strategies. 3  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 75% of all students in grades 1-5 will achieve their individualized learning targets in Reading as a result of enhanced direct instruction through the Teachers College Reading Project as measured by pre and post examinations in ELA. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teacher teams will participate in the TCRWP to include 15 coaching sessions and 25 Professional Development Days focusing on effective reading strategies. All classroom teachers teachers August 2018-June 2019- TCRWP Staff, School Administrators, Teacher Teams All classroom teachers teachers October 2018-December 2018 DOE Central Staff, School Administrators, Teacher Teams Teachers will participate in a professional development series focusing on data-driven instruction and differentiated instructional strategies. Teacher Teams will participate in Professional Teaching Learning Cycles focusing on "unpacking the standards" as a means to develop a more concrete understanding of the standard and thereby aid them in developing, planning and delivering common lessons.The PTLC will include 6 steps: Studying Common Core Standards, Researching Instructional Strategies based on student data and the needs of students, Planning a Common Lesson, Teaching the Common Lesson, Reviewing and Sharing Data From the Common Lesson and Revising and Re-teaching the Common Lesson if Needed. Teachers will participate in at-least 4 cycles during the school year. During the research stage of the PTLC Teacher Teams will research appropriate instructional strategies to utilize during the common lesson they will teach based on the needs of their students ( front loading information, graphic organizers, etc.) Teachers will plan and deliver lessons aligned to student engaged assessment practices. Teachers will monitor and assist with establishing individual Learning Targets for students that 5  will be tracked throughout the school year and celebrated during student-led conferences. Teachers will utilize Doug Lemov's Teach Like A Champion techniques to improve lesson delivery and classroom management. Model classrooms will be established as labs for professional development and will focus on the Instructional Focus of the Month and/or Best Practices. A Calendar of classroom visits (formal and informal observation) will be developed and consulted frequently to ensure that each teacher is visited with a focus on the selected competency. Through the use of a school wide Common Core aligned discussion rubric, teachers will monitor student achievement towards meeting the standards. Information gathered during classroom observations aligned to the elements of component 3b, 3c and 3d and student data reviews will be utilized to adjust and revise teaching practices through strategic professional development planning throughout the school year. Students will utilize TCWRP Strategies . Students who are below grade level in reading as per their Fountas and Pinnell and/or the NYS ELA Stae Exam (Level 1 and 2) will receive At-risk Intervention Services during and/or after-school aligned to their Individuals Learning Targets.. Students in grades 1Kgnthrough 5 September 2018 to June 2019 Classroom Teachers AIS Teachers Daily, Monthly, as per Benchmark 6 Student will utilize daily "I can..." statements, and participate in frequent data analysis of their work to assist them with reaching long term individualized learning goals aligned to CCLS. Students will set short and long term goals Students' will utilize the school wide guidelines for student to student conversations (bottom lines) during classroom discussions to develop a deep understanding of the concepts . Students will participate in Student Led Conferences to share with parents and teachers their progress and towards reaching CCLS. Parents will be invited to various celebrations of student achievement and academic workshops throughout the school year (ie: Student-Led Conferences, Common Core Standards, At-Home Strategies, Homework Help, Ready Gen, etc.) Parents and Families Septembe 2018 to June 2019 Administrators, Parent Coordinator, CBO's Monthly 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will complete a parent involvement survey to determine their interest and needs with respect to partnering with us at PS 329...Parents will be invited to Family Engagement Workshops which will focus the ELA Instruction their children are receiving and will receive guidance and assistance with respect to supporting their child's academic needs at home...During workshops parents will receive resources to utilize at home aligned to their children's ELA instructional needs. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. As a Title 1 School Wide Program School, we utilize Conceptual Consolidation by combining federal, state, and local funds such as; Title 1, Title 2 , Title 3, Tax levy Fair Student Funding and other available resources such as Citywide Instructional Expectations, to carry out our instructional strategies/activities to achieve this goal. By combining our fiscal and human resources we are able to implement the following program components of this goal in fiscal year 2018-2019: funding for professional development contracts, funding for professional literature resources, per session funding for professional development after-school initiatives Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 7  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By March 2018: 1. In September 2018 teachers will administer Baseline Assessments in Reading 2. Beginning in October 2018, students with the guidance of their teachers will set individual Learning Target Goals aligned to their needs with respect to meeting CCLS in writing as per the baseline data. 3. Students will receive instruction aligned to their Learning Target. 4. By February of 2019, 75 % of students in grades kgn -5 will meet their mid-year reading benchmark as measured by the Fountas and Pinnell Reading Assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Fountas and Pinnell Reading Assessment and TCRWP and End Unit Assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Data Analysis/Needs : Data Analysis/Needs: *During the 2015-2016 school year, we were placed on the Potentially Dangerous School List. This determination was based on an increase in incidents considered physically aggressive. Although we reduce our index to 0.81 in 2016-2017, we would like to continue to reduce the number of student related physically aggressive incidents as well as continue to improve teacher classroom management procedures and management of student behaviors. *During the 2016-2017 school year the number of level 3 and 4 incidents increased by 25% due to repeated offenders. In 2017-2018 these leveled incidents were reduced by 12%. This indicates that special targeted attention and intervention is needed for specific students who are involved in repeated disruptive incidents. *In March 2018, many of our teachers reported on an in-house teacher survey that they felt student disruptive behavior continued to cause issues in their classroom. We would like to continue stream-line teacher support and training with respect to classroom management and managing student difficult behavior. Strengths as per the 2017 QR: *The school coordinates curriculum nights and parent-teacher conferences for parents to help them partner and interact with the school. During the parent meeting, families shared their experiences as students at the school or having children who have graduated and the direct integral role the school plays in helping them better understand the demands of the Common Core and next level readiness in middle and high schools. One parent shared that the school has high expectations for children at the school because the level of work that is given to students, for example in regards to research projects, debates, evaluating sources, and using sophisticated evidence to support their thinking, is comparable to work seen at the college level. Parents shared that they are empowered through online resources available to them and face-to-face parent interactions to support their children in meeting or exceeding the school’s elevated expectations for their children Part 2 – Annual Goal 9  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 75% of targeted students will reach their behavioral goals as a result of improved teacher classroom and behavioral management systems and measured by a decrease in disruptive incidents reported in the Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS) and Teacher In-house Surveys . 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 1. School-wide Behavior Management Expectations will be implemented by all teachers to promote an environment where students can thrive academically, socially and emotionally. The expectations are aligned to our school mantra , "EMPOWER". This will include clearly defined, grade specific expectations, rewards and consequences. 2. All staff will receive refresher training aligned to Therapeutic Crisis Intervention, and will continue to be expected to implement these de-escalation strategies when working with students. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All staff members September-2018 to June 2019 Administrators, Teacher Teams, CBO's 3. Strategic classroom support will be provided to the teachers identified in need based upon classroom visits, observations and occurrence report data October 2018-May 2019 4. The PBIS Team will meet bi-monthly to plan strategic assistance for students and staff. 5. A Restorative Practice Team will provide training and assistance with regard to managing preventing and disruptive behavior with-in classroom . 6. All classroom teachers will teach weekly aligned to Sanford Harmony character education program. 7. The Empowerment Dollar will be utilized as an incentive for positive behavior. 8.Teachers will select an Empowered Student of the week to be celebrated at a weekly school-ceremony. UFT PLC Staff, PBIS Team Members Classroom Teachers, Administrators 1 1. Students will learn and practice the expected behaviors aligned to the school wide mantra. All students September 2018 to June 2019 Administrators, Teachers, Guidance Counselor's , CBO's 2. Students will participate in weekly Sanford Harmony Lessons aligned to the behaviors of "EMPOWER". 2. Students will receive incentives for exhibiting the behavior of an Empowered Student. 3. Targeted students will receive support aligned to their specific needs. Parents will be invited to parent workshops and parent support group activities focusing on student social and emotional topics. Parents and Families Parents will be provided with customized support focusing on assisting their children with social and emotional growth. Parents will be offered incentives when children have improvement September 2018 to May 2019 Administrators, Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors, CBO's 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be invited to parent workshops and parent support group activities focusing on student social and emotional topics September 2018, (November2019, February 2019, April 2019). These workshops will be conducted by CBO's, Student Support Personnel and coordinated by our Parent Coordinator. Parents will be provided with customized support focusing on assisting their children with social and emotional growth. This support will be provided as needed throughout the school year and coordinated by our Student Support Personnel Parents will be offered incentives when children have improvement. Incentives will be given on a monthly basis throughout the school year and coordinated by the school administration. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2  As a Title 1 School Wide Program School, we utilize Conceptual Consolidation by combining federal, state, and local funds such as; Title 1, Title 2 , Title 3, Tax levy Fair Student Funding and other available resources such as Citywide Instructional Expectations, to carry out our instructional strategies/activities to achieve this goal. By combining our fiscal and human resources we are able to implement the following program components of this goal in fiscal year 2018-2019: funding for professional development contracts, funding for professional literature resources, per session funding for professional development afterschool initiatives, funding for student enrichment programs, funding for student and parent incentive programs, funding for parent workshops Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 A review of school wide occurrence report data and teacher anecdotal records will show a decrease in the number of reported incidents of targeted students during the same period in 2018, as well as a decrease in the number of incidents from September 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Staff Surveys and OORS Data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Data Analysis- As per the 2018 NYS Math Exam, 18.4% of our students in grades 3, 4 & 5 scored at the proficiency level. This is 3% higher than 2017 and 5% less than 2016. The 2018 Performance Series indicates that 53% of our students in grades 3, 4 & 5 scored far below the National Norm. Although our overall student proficiency increased 3% as per the NYS Math Exam, 91% of 4th Grade students are below grade level proficiency. Special Education students are also far below grade level proficiency...Only 9.5% scored at or above grade level on the Spring 2018 MATH Exam...This is a 5.5% increase from 2017.. The slight improvements can be attributed to our participation in professional development aligned to Algebra For All... This indicates that teachers benefit from enhanced professional development aligned to their specific struggles with respect to mathematics instruction, Strengths in this area as evidence by the 2017 QR report included: In an effort to build coherence, teachers plan using a similar tool which includes similar elements regardless of the content area. For example, the template captures learning targets, understandings, knowledge, essential questions, skills, and assessment evidence. For example, teachers include the type of formative data they are using at the end of the lessons, including exit slips, conference notes, and their observations for lessons taught. Tasks incorporate students using different opportunities to find main idea and make inferences. Learning targets are student friendly language so that students knew what was expected of them by the end of the lesson. Units of study allow for additional phonics instruction for lower grades and additional time for academic vocabulary and comprehension supports for upper-grade students. 4  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 75% of targeted students in grades 3-5 will reach their individual learning target in mathematics as a result of teachers working collaboratively to create enhanced units of study in mathematics as measured by the NYC Periodic Assessments and Scantron Computer Adaptive Assessments. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). We are departmentalized in mathematics in grades 4 through 5. Our math teachers teach mathematics to all classes on their grade level. Teachers will supplement the Go Math Curriculum to enhance academic rigor (ie Engagenyc, Exemplars, iReady) . Teachers will participate in Professional Development focusing on academic rigor in math instruction, Data-Driven Instruction and Creating Differentiated Lessons, lesson planning and Unit Design. Our Principal and Grade 5 Math Teacher will participate in Algebra For All Professional Development, and turn key appropriate strategies and practices to the 3rd and 4th grade math teacher. Teachers will utilize Backwards Planning Strategies and will utilize a pacing calendar to assist with ensuring CCLS Math Practices are addressed daily. Teachers will plan and deliver lessons aligned to student engaged assessment practices. Teachers will monitor and assist with establishing individual Learning Targets for students that will be tracked throughout the school year and celebrated during student-led conferences Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Math Teachers and ICT Sped Teachers Grades 3, 4 & 5 September 2018- June 2019 Administrators, Teachers, Generation Ready November 2018-April 2019 (3 times per month per month) Administrators, Teachers, Generation Ready, DCC Staff Administrators, Teachers, Teacher Teams 3 times per school year October 2018-May 2019) Administrators, Teachers, Generation Ready 6  Teacher will work with a mathematics coach who will assist with establishing Model classrooms as lab sites for professional development and will focus on the Algebra for All philosphy and Math Best Practices. A Calendar of classroom visits (formal and informal observation) will be developed and consulted frequently to ensure that each teacher is visited with a focus on the selected competency. Information gathered during classroom observations aligned to the elements of component 3b, 3c and 3d and student data reviews will be utilized to adjust and revise teaching practices through strategic professional development planning throughout the school year. Administrators, Teachers Administrators, Teachers, Generation Ready Administrators Administrators September 2018-June 2019 October 2018-June 2019 November 2018-June 2019 (Twice a month) October 2018-June 2019 October 2018-June 2019 Students will utilize daily "I can..." statements, and participate in frequent data analysis of their work to assist them with reaching long term individualized learning goals aligned to CCLS. Students Grades 3, 4 & 5 September 2018 - June 2019 Administrators and Teachers Students' will utilize the school wide guidelines for student to student conversations (bottom lines) during classroom discussions to develop a deep understanding of the concepts . 7 Students will participate in Student Led Conferences to share with parents and teachers their progress and towards reaching CCLS. Students who are below grade level will receive At-Risk Intervention Services during or after-school Parents will be invited to various celebrations of student achievement and workshops throughout the school year (ie: Student-Led Conferences, Common Core Standards, At-Home Strategies, Homework Help, Go Math, etc.) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Parents Grades 3, 4 & 5 September 2018- June 2019 Administrators, Teachers, CBO's, Parent Coordinator How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be invited to various celebrations of student achievement and workshops throughout the school year (ie: Student-Led Conferences, Common Core Standards, At-Home Strategies, Homework Help, Go Math, etc.) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. As a Title 1 School Wide Program School, we utilize Conceptual Consolidation by combining federal, state, and local funds such as; Title 1, Title 2 , Title 3, Tax levy Fair Student Funding and other available resources such as Citywide Instructional Expectations, to carry out our instructional strategies/activities to achieve this goal. By combining our fiscal and human resources we are able to implement the following program components of this goal in fiscal year 2018-2019: funding for professional development contracts, funding for professional literature resources, per session funding for professional development afterschool initiatives Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. In September 2018 teachers will administer Baseline Periodic Assessments and Scantron Computer Adaptive Assessments . 8  2. Beginning in October 2018, students with guidance from their teachers will begin to set individualize goals/learning targets aligned to the CCLS based on NYC Periodic Baseline Assessments. 3 In March of 2019, 75% students' Go Math Scores will show an increase in the number of questions answered correctly that are aligned to their Learning Target Goal as per the CCLS Baseline Periodic Assessments and Scantron Computer Adaptive Assessments . Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Go Math Baseline Assessments and Go Math End of Chapter Exams Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As of June 2017 , The number of students scoring grade level proficiency decreased from 25% (2016) to 21% in 2017 as per the 2017 NYS ELA Exam. Strengths in this area as evidence by the 2017 QR report included: School leaders strategically assign coaches and teacher leaders to help other staff members with a focus on school goals. There is a clear connection between the support provided by Teachers College consultants and an increase in the quality of teaching and improvement in students’ reading levels and student essays displayed in classrooms and on bulletin boards. The school has lead teachers and content specialists who help to redesign integrated curricula and the implementation of effective teaching practices. For example, the school strategically interviews, hires, and then program teachers who have experience helping students become more organize, disciplined in action and thought, and collaborate with each other. Many personnel have training on how to handle and deescalate problematic situations, which in turn promotes positive academic and personal behaviors. The principal shared specific examples of newly hired teachers to the school who have experience in other subject areas that help create interdisciplinary projects for students to demonstrate higher-order thinking skills in research papers. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Through a comprehensive professional learning plan and support of school leaders, teachers will demonstrate effective teaching practices in writing instruction resulting in 75% of students in grade 1 through 5 reaching their learning target in writing as measured by the TCRWP End Unit Assessments. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers and administrators will participate in Professional Development focusing on Teaching Writing utilizing the Teachers College Writing Program. Model Classrooms will be established as Lab-sites and will focus on the Instructional Focus of the Month and/or Best Practices. Teachers in grade 1 through 5, ICt and Sped Teachers) August 2018 - June 2019 (25 Pd Days @ TC and 30 coaching days @ ps329) Teachers will utilize The TC Units of Study in Writing to plan and deliver lessons to their students . Teachers will participate in PD focusing on Data Driven Instruction and Differentiated Instructional Strategies. Teachers will monitor and assist with establishing individual Learning Targets for students that will be tracked throughout the school year and celebrated during student-led conferences Administrators, Teachers and TC Staff Administrators, Teachers and TC Staff September 2018-June 2019 October 2018- December 2018 October 2018-June 2019 1  A Calendar of classroom visits (formal and informal observation), Focus walks and intervisitations, will be developed and consulted frequently to ensure that each teacher is visited with a focus on the selected competency.  Information gathered during classroom observations aligned to the elements of component 3b, 3c and 3d and student data reviews will be utilized to adjust and revise teaching practices through strategic professional development planning throughout the school year. Administrators, Teachers and DCC Staff October 2018-June 2019 Administrators, Teachers and DCC Staff October 2018-June 2019 Administrators, Teachers Administrators, Administrators, Teachers, CBO's Student will utilize daily "I can..." statements, and participate in frequent data analysis of their work to assist them with reaching long term individualized learning goals aligned to CCLS. Studentsi Grade 1 through 5 October 2018- June 2019 Students' will utilize the school wide guidelines for student to student conversations (bottom lines) during classroom discussions to develop a deep understanding of the concepts . Students will participate in Student Led Conferences to share with parents and teachers their progress and towards reaching CCLS. 2 Students below grade level will receive At-Risk Inretvetion Services during and/or after-school Parents will be invited to various celebrations of student achievement and workshops throughout the school year (ie: Student-Led Conferences, Common Core Standards, At-Home Strategies, Homework Help, etc.) Parents of students grades 1 through 5 September 2018- June 2019 Administrators, Teachers, CBO's, Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Survey in September 2018, Engagement Activities aligned to survey will begin in October 2018, Parent Engagement Point System to encourage Parents to participate in school parent initiatives will begin October 2018, Parent Awards Dinner for the most involved parents will take place May 2019. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. As a Title 1 School Wide Program School, we utilize Conceptual Consolidation by combining federal, state, and local funds such as; Title 1, Title 2 , Title 3, Tax levy Fair Student Funding and other available resources such as Citywide Instructional Expectations, to carry out our instructional strategies/activities to achieve this goal. By combining our fiscal and human resources we are able to implement the following program components of this goal in fiscal year 2018-2019: funding for professional development contracts, funding for professional literature resources, per session funding for professional development afterschool initiatives Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By March 2018: 1. In September 2018 teachers will administer Baseline TCRWP Assessment in Writing. 2. Beginning in October 2018, students with the guidance of their teachers will set individual Learning Target Goals aligned to their needs with respect to meeting CCLS in writing as per the baseline data and students will receive instruction aligned to their Learning Target. 3  4. By March 2019 75% of students in grade 1-5 will meet their mid year learning target as measured by the TCWRP End Unit Assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. TC Baseline and Unit Assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Data Analysis/Needs Our overall attendance data noted that overall Student Attendance for school year 15-16 was 91.12%%, 89.70% for school year 16-17 and 88.01% for school year 17-18. Students Chronically Absent as 34% in 15-16, 34% in 16-17 and 39% in 17-18. Only 23.7% of students scored at a level of proficiency on the NYS 2018 ELA Exam and only 18.4% of students scored at a level of proficiency on the NYS 2018 Math Exam. Moreover only 40% of students school-wide are reading at proficiency based on June 2018 F & P Reading Assessments This supports the fact that students must be in school to benefit from the instruction that their teachers have to offer. Students need incentives to come to school and parents need an enhanced awareness and understanding of importance of their children attending school and the benefits of student mastery of the common core standards. The need to improve the relationship between the school and the families of the chronically absent students is evident. Support for these families must be aligned to their specific needs and collaborations with CBO will assist with this need. Strengths as per the 2017 QR There is a well-coordinated system of communication between the school and parents. An overwhelming amount of parents shared that the school provides ongoing, clear lines of verbal, online, and email communication to them about graduation, college and career readiness and standards for performance. There are student-led conferences held in the spring where students lead the conversation about their strengths and areas of growth as a learner in relation to the Common Core Learning Standards. During the parent meeting, one parent commented that she 5  learned how to do the ‘new math’ after her daughter showed an explanation of how she used a model to help her solve a multistep problem. Other parents readily chimed in to support that the school offers parent workshops, the sophisticated school website with a plethora of resources to support the implementation of Common Core-aligned materials, which they use to help their children complete projects, tasks, and homework. As a result, parents are well informed about their child’s progress on a regular basis and partner with the school to ensure continued success.  Teachers and other staff members have clear, systematic structures, to help articulate student performance in relation to college and career readiness expectations. For example, during the large and small group meetings, students were able to articulate the trajectory between the subject matter they were learning in class with their chosen career path. One student shared, “I want to be a dance instructor when I grow up and being a part of the dance program helps me learn how to teach and how to become a better dancer.” Students made the relation to being a journalist presenting his or her perspective and backing up with they write or say with factual evidence like what their teachers require of them in social studies, mathematics, and science. Students review learning progressions and receive guidance and advice on their next steps with clear expectations for the subsequent school year when transitioning between grades. More students have auditioned and created portfolios to gain acceptance into elite gifted middle schools in the district. As a result, all students, including high-need populations, have a deepened understanding of what is expected of them to reach the next level in their educational journey. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound.  By June 2019 75% of targeted chronically absent students will meet their individual learning targets in ELA as a result of needs based intervention and measured by improved Fountas and Pinnell Reading Assessment scores. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administrators, Teachers, Paras, Parent Coordinator Administrators, Teachers, Paras, Parent Coordinator  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Establish an attendance Improvement Team and Guidelines Students chronically absent and their parents October 2018-June 2019  Attendance Team Memebers and Classroom Teachers will conduct daily calls to the homes of students who are absence to provide support and build positive relationships.  Conduct weekly meetings to review weekly school-wide attendance and identify students who are developing a pattern that may lead to chronic absenteeism.  Conduct Frequent Student Summit and a Parent Summit to support students and families with Attendance Improvement.  Assign each grade an Attendance Buddy who will work with the families to assist with their attendance improvement. October 2018-June 2019 (Daily) October 2018-June 2019 (Weekly) November 2018-May 2019 (4 Times Per Year) October 2018-June 2019 (Daily) 7   Utilize the Kinvolved messaging application to monitor attendance and collect data on reason for student absences. Use this data to provide family support.  Create an individual attendance plan of improvement for each student based on their needs as noted in the attendance data.  Utilize Kinvolved and school messenger to contact parents with attendance reminders and messages.  Create weekly and monthly school-wide attendance incentives for students.  Create attendance incentives aligned to attendance improvement for parents and families.  Utilize the attendance teacher to conduct home visits to set up appointments to meet with parents who we are unable to contact by phone.  Utilize city agencies to assist when needed.  Workshops will be planned and conducted based on parent interests as well as the academic needs of their children. Instructional Workshops will be conducted by the academic staff and will be geared towards parents and the needs of their children. October 2018-June 2019 (Daily) October 2018-June 2019 (As needed) October 2018-June 2019 (As needed) October 2018-June 2019 (Daily) October 2018-June 2019 (throughout the school year) October 2018-June 2019 (As needed) October 2018-June 8  2019 (Monthly)) *Students will participate in after-school academic and/or enrichment program Targeted Students October 2018 - June 2019 Teacher Teams, Parent Coordinator,Administrators, CBO's *Students will be assigned an attendance buddy Students will receive counseling service if necessary *Students will receive incentives for improving their attendance Parents/families will receive needs specific assistance to assist their children with coming to school. All Parents October 2018-May 2019 Parent Coordinators, Administrators, Teacher Teams , CBO's Parents will complete a Parent Involvement Survey to indicate their needs, wants and interest as it pertains to parent involvement activities at PS 329. Parents will receive incentives for participating in parent involvement activities through our Parent Involvement Points Program. Parents will receive a Parent Point Card to record their points and will be challenged to earn at least 20 points for the school year. Parents will receive prizes for every 5 points earned. *Collaborations with Lutheran Hospital includes family counseling and case management to assist families with a wealth of support aligned to the needs of the family 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All Parents October Lutheran Partners 2018- May 2019 If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. YMCA, YWCA, BAC, New York Cares, Change For Kids, Alvin Ailey, Lutheran Health Services, Food Bank Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 9  As a Title 1 School Wide Program School, we utilize Conceptual Consolidation by combining federal, state, and local funds such as; Title 1, Title 2 , Title 3, Tax levy Fair Student Funding and other available resources such as Citywide Instructional Expectations, to carry out our instructional strategies/activities to achieve this goal. By combining our fiscal and human resources we are able to implement the following program components of this goal in fiscal year 2017-2018: funding for professional development contracts, funding for professional literature resources, per session funding for professional development afterschool initiatives Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By March 2019: 1. Parents complete the Parent Involvement Survey. 2.At least 2 Monthly Parent Involvement Activities are planned aligned to the results of the Parent Survey. 3.Family workshops planned and conducted each month aligned to the academic needs of the students in each grade. 4. After-school Tutoring Program has commenced. 5. Instructional plan for targeted students created. 5. Benchmark Data of targeted students and instructional plan revised as per the needs of the student 6. Parents receive incentives for point accrued. 7 By March 2019, 75% of target students will have improved F&P scores. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ATS Attendance Data (Targeted Students)---Monthly Data 2017-2018 compared to Monthly Data 2018-2019 Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students who received 1 on their Spring 2016 ELA Assessments Students who received 1 on their Spring 2016Math Assessments Students who have not mastered at least80% of the sciencestandards Students who have not mastered at least80% of the social studies standards Students with repeated disruptive behavioral incidents Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Guided Reading, Phonemic Awareness Small Group Tutoring Computer Adaptive Program Small Group Tutoring Needs based targeted strategies. Small group instruction. Needs based targeted strategies. small group instruction. Afterschool Wednesdays and/or Thursday Afterschool Wednesdays and/or Thursday During an in-class intervention period one day per week During an in-class intervention period one day per week Peer Intervention, Conflict Resolution Small Group and/or One-to-One During and/or Afterschool 1  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We have 6 students. Services will be provided on a needs basis, based on a verbal and observational needs assessment. Students will receive uniforms, transportation, school supplies, access to after school tutorial and enrichment programs, mental health services and referrals to various city agencies based on student and family needs. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). na 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2  na 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. na 3  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. School administration will attend teacher recruitment fairs and reach out to education departments of prestigious colleges and university to recruit future graduates who have state certification to teach in elementary school teaching positions in pre kindergarten through grade 5. Teachers once hired will be matched with mentors and will receive support through professional development in- house staff and through contracted professionals. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Through staff development team building activities and teacher mentoring school administration will work to cultivate, retain and support highly qualified teachers Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 4  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Parent Involvement Activities- Open Houses and Parent information sessions to acclimate parents to elementary school 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. A committee was formed where teachers had the opportunity to select assessments that would be used for measures of student learning in conjunction with the new teacher evaluation system. Professional development regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction takes place weekly during grade meetings 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) X X X Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) 1Explanation/Background: Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 331,537.00 81,658.00 0 0 2,460,211.00 5  Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities 6  funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 7  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 329 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 329 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 8  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 9  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary School Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) [PS 329] , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 0  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 1  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 3  ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 4  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 21 School Name The Surfside School Borough Brooklyn School Number 329 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Ms. Salema Marbury Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ms. Merlisa Cornwall Teacher/Subject Area type here Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider Ms. Lisa Sutain Superintendent Ms. Isabel DiMola Assistant Principal Ms. Lisa Lafontant Coach type here School Counselor Ms. Lisa Nieves Parent Ms. Angela Ferguson Parent Coordinator Ms. Leah Depena Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) Ms. Tina Murlin Acting A.P. C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 379 5 Total number of ELLs 18 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 4.75%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 4 3 Lang. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? P.S.329 will use various assessment tools to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs. Students will demonstrate their learning through performance assessments derived from Lucy Calkins Teachers College Reading and Writing Units of study. These performance assessments engage students in authentic, high-level work that is aligned to curricular standards so that teachers can more carefully plan for instruction that meets students where they are and moves them forward. They were designed to align to particular Common Core State Standards in reading and writing, and to anchor specific units of study in data collection and close observation of student work. The curriculum for these units supports students in learning to grasp major ideas and concepts as well as information and related to specific topics through focused studies. Moreover, these units, also support students in reading to acquire and use both academic vocabulary and domain-specific vocabulary. Fountas and Pinnell Reading assessment results will be used to group children according to their needs. This benchmark system identifies independent and guided reading levels, reading comprehension tasks and vocabulary development. This information will assist us in targeting where development is needed for each child to meet the designated literacy benchmark for their grade . Grades 6  3-5 will utilize City/State tests, Performance Assessments, F and P Assessments, and teacher evaluations to identify specific student needs and align instruction.The utilization of TCRWP Benchmarks in Reading These benchmarks are established and monitored quarterly. In addition, benchmarks provide P.S. 329 teachers with and additional lens by which to target their small group and guided reading instruction. Through conferencing, these benchmarks are used as a personal goal for each student to strive for by the upcoming target dates. Students will also be assessed using I-Ready Diagnostic and Instruction. This program will assist in identifying specific weaknesses of students in phonemic awareness, phonics, high frequency words, vocabulary and comprehension. Based on results of the I-Ready Diagnostic, students will be placed into student instruction customized to their placement levels. The classroom and ENL teacher will be provided with generated reports on students performance in each area assessed. In addition ELLs will learn test taking strategies. Teachers will help our ELLs develop higher level thinking skills and strategies by raising the student level of understanding from simple recall and comprehension to analysis, synthesis and evaluation according to Bloom's Taxonomy of Learning.We will continue to provide differentiated instruction, while setting individual bi-weekly goals and intervention plans for our ELLs. Their progress and gain will be monitored by our ENL provider and their classroom teacher. The information gathered will help us to evaluate the success of our program for ELLs 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Common planning time allocated to allow classroom teachers and our ENL teacher to analyze the data collected from formative and curriculum embedded assessments administered. This time enables teachers to reflectively plan instruction directly tailored to the specific needs their students. Teacher teams will participate in Professional Teaching Learning Cycles focusing on "unpacking the standards" as a means to develop a more concrete understanding of the standard and thereby aid them in developing, planning and delivering common lessons. The PTLC will include 6 steps: Studying Common Core Standards, Researching Instructional Strategies based on student data and the needs of students, Planning a Common Lesson, Teaching the Common Lesson, Reviewing and Sharing Data From the Common Lesson and Revising and Re-teaching the Common Lesson if needed. Teachers will participate in at-least 4 cycles during the school year. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? P.S.329 uses the results of the NYSESLAT, ELA and Math State exams to evaluate the success of our program for our ELLs. Other assessments we analyze include teacher observations, summative and formative assessments given with the curriculum (TCWRP) performance assessments and Go Math end of unit tasks) and of course ELL Periodic Assessments to monitor students' proficiency in all four modalities. According to NYSESLAT results of our students, we were able to determine that our ELLs face challenges in both Reading and Writing. Since these two modalities have been identified, we continue to provide the necessary support and adapt instruction through varying scaffolding strategies, through reading and writing, to ensure improved proficiency levels. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? I-Ready, a K- 12 adaptive diagnostic for reading and mathematics will be utilized. I-Ready is an engaging online assessment and instruction program which combines a valid and reliable growth measure and individualized instruction. Students receive online lessons featuring instruction appropriate to their level, based on results from the diagnostic. This program provides targeted instruction prioritizing students highest areas of need. I-Ready pinpoints student needs to the sub-skill level, and ongoing progress monitoring shows whether students are on track to achieve end-of-year targets. Students are provided with personalized student instruction targeted to students’ unique areas of needs. In addition, teachers in conjunction with students will reflect on areas of need and set goals to address these struggles. Teachers will create individualized intervention plans for students. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] 7  It is imperative that appropriate care is taken to guide instructional decisions made on behalf of our ELLs. Oftentimes, the signs of a student struggling with second language acquisition mimic those of a student with a Learning Disability (LD). For this reason, evidence suggests that ELLs identified as students with disabilities (SWD) are oftentimes struggling with issues that did not stem from LDs. However, following the protocols outlined in the OELL’s RTI Guide for Teachers of ELLs has helped our school design a more effective instructional program.The Response to Intervention (RTI) model significantly assists to help better serve English Language Learners (ELLs) who are at-risk for academic difficulties. RTI is an instructional model that aims at prevention and early intervention through a tiered system of instructional support ,one that adds layers of instructional support to the standard core curriculum delivered in school, based on the demonstrated and changing needs of the student learners. This includes levels of intervention and instruction that increase in duration and intensity over time. Tier 1 is the instructional core that is intended to incorporate high quality evidence-based instruction for all students. This includes instruction that has been shown to be effective for ELLs, and differentiation to meet students’ diverse needs. Instruction for ELLs in English language development is provided at the Tier 1 instructional level. Students move into Tier 2 and Tier 3 if they demonstrate a need for more targeted and intensive academic support. This extra support can occur in the classroom, but also in separate settings with instruction focused on specific learning targets. Tier 2 and Tier 3 instruction would also be tailored to meet ELLs language needs and be incorporated into research-based intervention strategies. As students improve, measured by reliable and valid assessments, the extra supports are removed. Classroom teachers will use research based strategies to provide RTI and AIS. Flexible students in grades 3-5 will participate in our at risk tutorial afterschool program and test prep using additional literacy and math materials.. Grade 2 students will receive intervention using (Words Their Way) a developmentally driven, hands on instructional approach which provides a practical way to study words with students. Students in grades K-1 will receive intensive instruction in letter formation, print knowledge, alphabetic awareness, phonological and phonemic awareness using Wilson's Fundations Program. Grouping allows for students to move between different groups based upon their performance and instructional needs. In addition students will receive I-Ready Diagnostic tailored intervention and instruction. Intensive Intervention is instruction delivered with increased opportunities for additional instruction, practice, and feedback. Multisensory approaches to instruction and intervention engage the visual, auditory, oral, and kinesthetic senses at the same time. Language development at all levels will be fostered through purposeful, deliberate conversation between teacher and students, and among students. Reading and writing is both taught as specific curricula, and integrated into each content area.. ELLs receive quality core instruction to link students’ background knowledge and daily lives to the content at hand, and provide experiences that show abstract concepts drawn from, and applied to, the everyday world. As is the case with all learners, ELLs require instruction that is cognitively challenging. Teachers target academically rigorous and challenging instructional goals, while simultaneously providing students with the instructional supports they need to achieve success. Building students’ abilities to form, express, and exchange ideas is best achieved through dialogue, questioning, and sharing ideas and knowledge. In these instructional conversations, the teacher listens carefully, and adjusts responses to assist students’ efforts. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. NYSESLAT data is used to evaluate and inform our ELL program. After reviewing the NYSESLAT scores, it is evident that the ELLs need to increase their reading comprehension and writing skills. Results of this exam indicate that about 50% of our ELLs scored in the Expanding category. Data patterns across proficiency levels revealed that most of our students gain proficiency in the Listening & Speaking modalities before Reading and Writing. As a result we will focus our instruction on building the reading comprehension and writing skills of our ELLs. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Findings are disseminated as administration shares NYSESLAT results and levels with our ENL teacher who then assists in ensuring to strategically place students in classes. The ENL teacher then shares findings with grade leaders at vertical team meetings as well as during grade level meetings. This process ensures that all pedagogues working with ELLs are fully informed and can properly support students. 8  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Instruction to our ELLs at P.S.329 is provided in both integrated and stand alone settings. The ENL teacher will provide the prescribed mandated allotment of time.. Stand alone ENL is instruction to develop English language skills so that students can succeed in core content courses. Integrated instruction is to build English language skills through content area instruction. The ENL students are placed in classrooms based on grade in heterogeneous grouping.The ENL teacher then supports the students in an integrated setting. Students will also receive homogeneous services in a stand alone setting based on students' proficiency level and skill. As per CR Part 154.2 requirements, we will be providing the required minutes via the stand alone and Integrated ENL program models. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Our students will receive instructional minutes based on CR Part 154 for English as a New Language. Students scoring at Beginner/Entering levels on the NYSESLAT or NYSITELL receive 360 ENL minutes. 180 standalone minutes of ENL instruction per week and 180 of integrated ENL minutes. The students who receive a score of intermediate/Emerging receive 360 ENL minutes ,90 standalone minutes a week, 180 integrated ENL minutes and 90 minutes of flexible minutes either stand alone or integrated instruction. Those students who receive a score of Intermediate/Transitioning receive a total of 180 minutes of ENL a week. 90 integrated ENL/ELA and 90 of flexible minutes either standalone OR integrated ENL. Advanced/ Expanding will receive 180 integrated ENL minutes a week. In addition those students who score Proficient/ Commanding on these exams will receive 90 minutes a week of ENL for two consecutive years after testing out. Our students are grouped by grade and proficiency levels. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content areas are delivered using ENL methodologies providing strategies for comprehension .The English Language Learners at PS 329 are supported with lessons that scaffold comprehension instruction and vocabulary development which are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. The students are driven to meet the CCLS through rigorous planning and instruction. The ENL instructor will use multiple entry points and will activate prior knowledge and build background as well as discovery. The ENL instructor will provide picture cards and use the Total Physical Response (TPR) method to engage in active learning and the Gradual Release of Responsibility method to teach students the art of following instructions and gaining independence. In addition the instructor will incorporate technology, visual aids, labeling, modified text and tasks , scaffolds, wait time, backwards /reflective planning, flexible grouping, oral readings using both fiction and non-fiction texts, art design, benchmark tests, and realia (culturally based). We also are using I-Ready as part of this instructional model. Instruction will be and has been presented in English; these may be presented orally, written or auditory using picture dictionaries and glossaries. By implementing these strategies, we attempt to gauge students' depth of learning to inform the direction of 9  further instruction, and students' abilities to analyze, evaluate, think critically, communicate effectively in all forms, solve real world problems, and even engage with others in social contexts. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? When appropriate and available ELLs are evaluated in their native language. If the child becomes LEP as per the NYSITELL results and speaks Spanish at home, an ENL pedagogue , Ms. Cornwall will administer the Spanish Lab. If a pedagogue or staff member is on hand that speaks the same home language as the child, that person will speak with the child to informally assess their knowledge of the native language. In this way, that child will have knowledge of who speaks their language in the school. During state exams, translated versions of the tests are made available to Chinese, Spanish and Russian speaking ELLs. ELLs are encouraged to write their responses in their native languages if it is more comfortable for them. Bilingual glossaries are printed out in the languages made available by the DOE testing website and distributed as well. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status To better service our ELL population, we have focused our efforts on developing literacy with a structured ENL instructional program. Teachers are encouraged to use ENL teaching strategies within all content areas. They will use multi-level approaches provided in The Teaching of Language Arts to Limited English Proficient/English Language Learners: A Resource Guide for All Teachers. The Balanced Literacy Program will serve as their primary source of literacy instruction as it incorporates ENL methodologies and strategies where appropriate. The Balanced Literacy Program will develop strong literacy skills through the exposure of authentic literature in read-alouds, shared readings, and accountable talks. Thus all students will develop listening, speaking and writing skills. Our newcomers program includes language development as well as content area instruction using ENL methodologies. Academic Intervention Service providers also provide them with small group instruction using research based programs. The AIS teacher utilizes tools such as ARIS and Acuity to support students who show continued weakness in phonemic awareness, phonics, letter recognition, fluency, reading comprehension, and writing. Academic Intervention Service providers also provide them with small group instruction using research based programs. Instruction using Wilson's Funadations as well as Starfall.com and Flocabulary.com interactive websites will also be utilized Ells receiving services 4-6 years will be involved in a Balanced Literacy Approach which incorporates the workshop model with instruction including the content areas of mathematics, science, and social studies. Instructional ENL lessons are designed to meet the needs of the learners focusing on word study, vocabulary building, reading comprehension, fluency, and testing strategies for ELA and mathematics.Small group differentiated instruction is provided during class time, ENL and AIS service Although we do not currently have Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE) we are prepared for any SIFE students who register. S.I.F.E students will be administered the Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment and this will be used to address suggested areas of instruction to further develop their strengths and struggles accurately and determine needed AIS services. Common Core Standard based instruction will be adapted to cover key information in an accessible way that is age appropriate and culturally relevant. Classrooms are equipped with Promethean Boards and computers to assist in providing visuals for these students. Former ELLS are identified to classroom teachers, and provided with continued support for two years upon scoring proficient/commanding on the NYSESLAT from our ENL teacher. The ENL teacher consults with the classroom teacher to monitor former ELL progress. The commanding student also sets academic goals which are monitored by the ENL teacher, who after conferring with the classroom teacher's lesson plan, will suggest and implement additional strategies which work toward the achievement of the goal. Checkpoints are also built in to the lesson to ensure the students comprehend the material and enables both the ENL and classroom teacher to address learning gaps. These students also receive the appropriate test modifications of extended time and re-reading of listening passages. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? 0  We are currently using Lucy Calkins Units of Study for Teaching Reading and Writing which provides rigorous grade level instructional strategies for the general education population as well as ELLs-SWD. Scaffolding strategies for ELLs are used to help unlock text. Activities and routines support reading, writing, speaking and listening and vocabulary acquisition. In addition to ELL-SWD's IEP mandated services these students are placed in classes with other ELLs on the same proficiency level. Content area instruction is differentiated to meet the needs of students. Teachers will use the Universal Design for Learning guidelines while planning and modifying instruction. The ENL teacher will create learning targets with aligned strategies and tasks. Students will have access to native language literature in classroom libraries.We also recommend that they attend the After School Tutorial/Enrichment Program.Computerized programs such as I-Ready and MobyMax will be utilized in conjunction with the use of laptops, ipads and Promethean boards. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? For our ELLs identified with special needs, our ENL provider meets with Special Ed, General Ed. and SETTS providers to discuss the goals and necessary modifications represented in students IEPs. Differentiation of lessons in each content area are ensured to assist in attainment of student personal goals. ELL-SWDs currently need remediation in reading and writing. Materials used to to engage ELL-SWD include ipad minis, Promethean boards and classroom computers. At risk tutorial using I-Ready and test prep are available for students in grade K-4. Words Their Way will be used in grade 2 and Wilson Fundations in grade K-1.Teachers also develop intervention plans for parents to assist in helping their child at home, this fosters our home school connection. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our targeted intervention program for ELLs in ELA, math, science and social studies includes, but is not limited to the use of I-Ready Diagnostic, an adaptive assessment program. Intervention services include small group instruction, AIS services and an after school tutorial/enrichment program. Small group instruction is differentiated based on formative assessment results and language proficiency levels. The modalities to be addressed are reading and writing with a focus on students who are on the Emerging and Entering levels. Our NYSITELL data indicates that a majority of our newly identified ELLs score in the entering and emerging categories. These students are invited to attend our after school tutorial program. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? P.S. 329 will be utilizing I-Ready Diagnostic an adaptive assessment program that leverages advanced technology to provide deep customized evaluation of every student. It then tracks student growth and provides individualized next step instruction. Domains addressed in ELA are Phonological Awareness, Phonics, High Frequency Words Vocabulary, Comprehension, Literature/Informational Text. In mathematics it addresses Numbers and Operations, Algebra and Algebra Thinking, Measurement and Data and Geometry. P.S.329 students learn through technology based lessons, incorporating interest learning style based activities. Classrooms will utilize ipads, laptops and additional Promethean Boards. This will allow students to access various multimedia. This will foster speaking and listening by allowing our students to be exposed to additional appropriate dictation, tone and syntax. Alvin Ailey theater will be returning this year allowing our students to participate in their elite dance program which features various types of dance such as West African, Modern, and Hip Hop/ Jazz. Students will partake in a culminating production in which parents , families and friends are invited. Talent options include team sports, dance, choral music, violin, photography, visual arts, gardening, horticulture and entrepreneurship training. We will also be partnering with Change For Kids. Change For Kids provides their partner schools with resources that will assist students in making strides in academic achievement, and developing 21st century Skills such as creativity, communication, collaboration and critical thinking. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All students including ELLs are invited to school programs to ensure they are exposed to the same Common Core aligned curriculum and are afforded equal access. They are invited by our certified ENL teacher to participate in our Alvin Ailey Dance 1  Program, violin program, our Intramural Basketball Team and our test prep tutorial/enrichment program. Letters in parents preferred language are sent home to families encouraging their children to participate. ELLs participate in the subject areas of technology, dance, physical education and the arts through out the school day. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials to support ELLS are both content and language based according to grade and language proficiency. Materials used are listening centers, Wilson Fundation Program, word banks, graphic organizers, Scholastics, and Dynamath. Teacher teams will participate in the TCRWP to include 15 coaching sessions and 25 Professional Development Days focusing on effective reading strategies. Students can also access Google translate for native language support. Technology for ELLS includes but is not limited to Flocabulary.com, starfall.com, everythingesl.net and I-Ready. Classrooms are equipped with Promethean Boards and have access to laptops and ipads. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Our Freestanding ENL program is English-only. However, we believe that students are best served when both languages are developed. While we do not provide language instruction in native languages, we do encourage parents and students to continue to develop their first languages. Bilingual books are available in the classroom library and offered to students to borrow and take home through our lending library. Students also have access to dictionaries, picture glossaries and Google translate. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Required service support and resources are created to appropriately meet developmental and academic states of all age grade and language proficiency. Resources include smartboards, Promethean Boards, ipads, classroom laptops, classroom libraries and a science lab. The ENL teacher supports the classroom teacher and they collaboratively plan and conduct lessons to promote reading comprehension, reading skills and strategies to expand vocabulary as well as instruction in all content areas. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Instructional materials to support ELLS are both content and language based according to grade and language proficiency. Materials used are listening centers, Wilson's Fundations Program, word banks, graphic organizers, Scholastics and Dynamath. Technology for ELLS includes but is not limited to Flocabulary.com, Starfall.com, everythingesl.net and I-Ready. Although P.S.329 shares a building with District 75 this co-location does not require us to share resources, therefore we continue to provide the necessary resources to ensure that all ELL's needs are met 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled ELLS are welcomed to tour our facility and meet with our parent coordinator, ENL teacher, dance and gym teachers and necessary translators to discuss resources and services available in our building and our community. Newly enrolled ELLs will be provided with an "ELL Ambassador" to assist in the orientation of the school and their school day. These ambassadors will also assist in the translation of directions into their home language as needed. Students will be invited to participate in an after-school academic and/or enrichment program , Alvin Ailey Dance and Boys Mentoring through Basketball programs and more... Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support our families and community engagement include but are not limited to… the YMCA, YWCA, BAC, New York Cares and Change For Kids. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 2  18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? ELL personnel will receive professional development through district offered PDs and through The Office of English Language Learners.. Our ENL teacher attends professional development sessions to learn innovative ENL strategies which are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards and NYS Learning Standards. These workshops will equip the ENL teacher, who will turnkey to the classroom teachers and paraprofessionals, with the knowledge required to assist the ELL student with the most up to date ENL strategies. Our ENL teacher will turnkey information from these workshops by conducting staff development during grade meetings on professional development days and during our "Marvelous Monday" PD allotted time.. Through articulation between the ENL teacher and the classroom teachers we will be able to provide data driven student needs based professional development. Teachers are encouraged to attend P.D. offerings through the Office of English Language Learners, BETAC and Protraxx. The ENL teacher attends professional development sessions and will turnkey the training to other staff members during faculty conference and or grade level conferences. P.S. 329 is currently using Teachers College Reading and Writing Curriculum and Go Math to assist us in aligning our instruction to the Common Core State Standards. Our staff members have received and continue to receive ELL professional development and support in the use of these two curriculums in the area of scaffolding and intervention for ELLs. Our certified ENL teacher works directly with teachers to assist in adapting these strategies. Teachers will participate in Professional Teaching Learning Cycles focusing on "unpacking the standards" as a means to develop a more concrete understanding of the standard and thereby aid them in developing, planning and delivering common lessons.The PTLC will include 6 steps: Studying Common Core Standards, Researching Instructional Strategies based on student data and the needs of students, Planning a Common Lesson, Teaching the Common Lesson, Reviewing and Sharing Data From the Common Lesson and Revising and Re-teaching the Common Lesson if Needed. Teachers will participate in at-least 4 cycles during the school year. During the research stage of the PTLC Teacher Teams will research appropriate instructional strategies to utilize during the common lesson they will teach based on the needs of their students ( front loading information, graphic organizers, etc. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our school follows a rich professional development plan. The ENL teacher participates in all trainings offered to regular classroom teachers, as well as specialized ENL trainings. Recent PD sessions have included OELL. The ENL teacher turnkeys the ENL trainings to the rest of the staff at grade level common planning meetings. Professional development for all staff who work with ELLs (classroom teachers, ICT teachers, cluster teachers, asst. principal, parent coordinator, paraprofessionals, guidance counselor, related service providers.) Further, teachers are encouraged to attend workshop offerings from OELL, and BETAC. Topics covered will include Collaboration and Co-Teaching, Scaffolding For Ells, Engaging Ells in Rigorous Instruction, Stages of Language Acquisition, Scaffolding Instruction for ELLs Using Sheltered Instruction and the Universal Design for learning. Copies of all Professional Development workshop agendas, attendance and distributed materials will be kept by our 3  ENL teacher. Our school will meet the 15% ELL-specific professional development for all teachers as per CR Part 154 during our Marvelous Monday professional development sessions where classroom teachers are addressed and advised as to strategies in which to engage and support ELLs in their classrooms. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In addition to mandated parent orientations meetings and DOE scheduled parent-teacher conferences our ELL students will receive student goal sheets and progress reports. ELL parents will be invited to individual meetings to discuss these reports along with language development progress, language proficiency assessment results and language development needs in all content areas after school during "Terrific Tuesdays" and student-led conferences. During these meetings we share NYSITELL and NYSESLAT results, formative assessments and students' short and long term goals in all content areas. These will be shared with parents in an effort to provide their current status as well as the additional support which needs to be given by both parents and teachers. Translators will be made available when necessary. Translation services available include all documentation translated in parents preferred language and either an in person translator or over the phone translators provided by the NYC Department of Education's Translation and Interpretation Unit. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parental involvement is stressed at the Surfside School. All parents including parents of ELLs are invited to attend an orientation, “A Meet and Greet” at the beginning of the school year. They participate in monthly PTA meetings and are invited to attend Parent Engagement Workshops in which teachers provide parents with strategies that can be utilized at home to assist students academically. Workshops will be planned and conducted based on parent interests as well as the academic needs of their children. Instructional Workshops will be conducted by the academic staff and will be geared towards parents and the needs of their children. We design ongoing family-centered workshops and events aligned to parent needs. We have existing collaborations with Partnerships for Students, Lutheran Family Services, Food Bank. This allows us to offer a wealth of services, above and beyond workshops, to help families with their specific needs. We provide ongoing communication with our families to ensure they are aware of their child’s progress. We prepare and distribute monthly student progress reports indicating students’ academic performance, college and career readiness including academic and social strengths/struggles and next steps. Ongoing communication is maintained with our parents with respect to academic information and resources, current events , school-wide initiative and extracurricular activities and shared via www.ps329.schoolwires.com .Parents will be invited to various celebrations of student achievement and workshops throughout the school year (ie: Student-Led Conferences, Common Core Standards, At-Home Strategies, Homework Help) Parents are kept abreast of all events taking place in our school through phone calls made to their homes by our school messenger system. Parents will complete a Parent Involvement Survey to indicate their needs, wants and interest as it pertains to parent involvement activities at PS 329. Parents will receive incentives for participating in parent involvement activities through our Parent Involvement Points Program. Parents will receive a Parent Point Card to record their points and will be challenged to earn at least 20 points for the school year. Parents will receive prizes for every 5 points earned. At least 2 Monthly Parent Involvement Activities are planned aligned to the results of the Parent Survey. Family workshops are planned and conducted each month aligned to the academic needs of the students in each grade. Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support our families and community engagement include but are not limited to… the YMCA, YWCA, BAC, New York Cares and Change For Kids. Parent Engagement Point System to encourage Parents to participate in school parent initiatives will begin October 2017, Parent Awards Dinner for the most involved parents will take place May 2018. 4  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 5 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Salema Marbury, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 6  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Surfside School DBN: 21K329 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Salema Marbury Title Principal Lisa Lafontant Assistant Principal Leah Depena Parent Coordinator Merlisa Cornwall ENL/Bilingual Teacher Angela Ferguson Parent Lisa Sutain Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Lisa Nieves School Counselor Isabel DiMola Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Tina Murlin Other Acting A.P. Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 7  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 21K329 School Name: The Surfside School Superintendent: Ms. DiMola The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Merlissa Cornwall ENL Teacher Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. After screening the students Home Language Surveys and ATS we determine the different languages spoken by our school families. The ENL teacher is consulted to determine what languages are needed for document translations. Teachers are informed of the opportunities for written and oral translation through the Office of Translation and Interpretation. Currently documents are translated from English to Spanish, Chinese, French, Arabic,Russian, Bengali. Language Identification cards are available in the main office and at the security desk. Our teachers are notified of the services of the Office of Translation and Interpretation Unit through the Staff Handbook. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 8  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic Bengali Uzbek Chinese Any Cantonese Mandarin English Russian Spanish 3 2 1 11 0 0 355 1 13 0.78 0.52 0.26 2.85 0 0 91.97 0.26 3.37 4 1 1 10 0 1 356 1 12 1.04 0.26 0.26 2.59 0 0.26 92.23 0.26 3.11 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Standards and Performance Documents September Translation and Interpretation Unit Report Cards At the end of each marking period NYCDOE translates report cards Student Progress Reports October, December, January, February, April, March Student Goal Sheets November/ March PTA/ SLT Meeting Announcements As Needed Translation services /staff translated document If a translation service such as The Big Word is used, documents will be sent out for translation in a timely fashion to ensure all parents receive notifications simultaneously. Translation services/ staff translated document School messenger, translation services, and staff translated documents 9  Conduct Safety and Discipline Special Education and Related Service Documents News Letters September As Needed Monthly After-School Program Information As Needed Notifications from Principal As Needed Translation and Interpretation Unit Translation and Interpretation Unit Translation Services and staff translated documents School messenger, translation services, and staff translated documents School messenger, translation services, and staff translated documents Parents Bill of Rights and The Expect Success Guide September DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit provides translated versions 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent Orientation /Curriculum Night September . Parent Teacher Conferences / Student Led Conferences End of Marking Period Grade aligned and needs based workshops for parents Monthly I.E.P Meetings As Scheduled Terrific Tuesdays at P.S.329 will allow us ample time for parent outreach Meetings as needed interpretation service(s)? Through a combination of in house pedagogues and staff fluent in needed language and by utilizing the Translation and Interpretation Unit over the phone service Through a combination of in house pedagogues and staff fluent in needed language and by utilizing the Translation and Interpretation Unit over the phone service Through a combination of in house pedagogues and fluent in needed language and by utilizing the Transportation and Interpretation Unit over the phone service Utilizing in house staff members and the Translation and Interpretation Unit over the phone service Utilizing in house staff members and the Translation and Interpretation Unit over the phone service 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 0  In the event of an emergency we will use in house staff members who speak the language needed to contact families. We will continue to utilize a variety of means to ensure timely translations to meet the needs of our Parent Community. School Messenger, School Website, Translation Services, and staff translated documents ensure parent/school communication. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Chancellor's Regulations A-663 are reviewed during our opening Faculty Conference. Staff is advised of translation services available to them as well as procedures to follow when parents are in need of translation services. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) P.S.329 will fulfill parental notification requirements for translation and interpretation services by placing our welcome poster in a prominent location near the primary entrance of our school. In addition,visible signs regarding visitor access in covered D.O.E languages to ensure that parents are not prevented from reaching the office due to language barriers. Our parents will be provided with a copy of the Parents' Bill of Rights and Expect Success in their native language. Our safety agents will receive over-the-phone cards that outlines how to obtain an interpreter, multiple copies of our Language Identification Guide will be provided to office staff. Office staff will be trained on using the guide to help determine the language spoken by the parent. We will post an administrative bulletin on our school website to school staff twice a year reminding them of their responsibility to communicate with limited English proficient parents, and what resources are available to them to do so. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services utilizing a parent survey distributed during parent teacher conferences. We will also gather information during parent out reach on our "Terrific Tuesday" sessions. 1 
