2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 13K350 School Name: URBAN ASSEMBLY HIGH SCHOOL OF MUSIC AND ART Principal: PAUL THOMPSON 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Urban Assembly School of Music and Art 331300011350 9 - 12 School Number (DBN): 13K350 49 Flatbush Ext. Brooklyn, New York 11201 718-858-0492 Fax: 718.858.0249 Phone Number: Alma Encarnacion aencarnacion5@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Paul J. Thompson Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Augustine Rodriguez Carmen Laracuente Edward Hightower KianaDixon Center For Supportive Schools CBO Representative: Geographical District: 13 District Information Janis Ross Superintendent: 1396 Broadway Brooklyn, New York 11221 Superintendent’s Office Address: jross11@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718.455.4635 Phone Number: 718.455.4684 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Brooklyn North FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Bernadette Fitzgerald Executive Director: 131 Livingston Brooklyn, New York 11201 BFitzge@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718.935.3954 Phone Number: 718.935.2382 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Paul J. Thompson Augustine Rodriguez Carmen Laracuente Edward Hightower KianaDixon N/A Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Parent Member/Parent 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  SamirVural JadaMcClary Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Student Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? UAMA is centered on the belief that by enabling our students to decode the complex world around them and effectively express themselves, we will develop mature, critically thinking individuals with the skills to make them college ready, so to confront whatever lies in their future. In order to achieve this we must provide students with a rigorous advanced curriculum at every grade level to ensure their preparedness to take college classes. UAMA’s structure for improvement seeks to provide students and teachers with the necessary supports to achieve the common mission of the school. In order to accomplish this, school structures focus on strengthening the instructional core to create a culture that promotes students to think like college students and problem-solve like professionals in the workplace. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. UAMA Demographic Data Grade Configuration: 9-12 Total Number of Students Enrolled: 255 Male: 34% - Female: 65% Attendance: 81% Tittle I Population: 74.7% Free Lunch: 73.6% Reduced Lunch: 6.6% Four Year Graduation Rate: 78% Six Year Graduation Rate: 72.2% Academic Programs and Partnerships The Bard Early College Academy at the Urban Assembly School of Music and Art. The Bard Early College Academy at the Urban Assembly School of Music and Art (UAMA) is an early college partnership that establishes a satellite campus of Bard College at UAMA. The early college partnership enables students in 11th and 12th grade to enroll as part-time undergraduate students of Bard College. Participating students take a liberal arts college course of study and earn tuition-free college credits concurrently with their high school studies. The early college aims to intellectually engage UAMA students and help them prepare for and succeed in college. All college courses are taught by Bard Early College faculty, and take place at the UAMA campus and within the UAMA course schedule, with additional participation in field trips, including participation in conferences and academic events on the Bard College campus in Annandale-on-Hudson as well as joint programming with Bard’s other 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  early colleges in the tri-state area. Upon completion of the Bard Seminar sequence, UAMA students have the opportunity to transfer as much as sixteen Bard College credits, tuition-free. Key Cognitive Strategies and Project-Based Learning At UAMA, we prepare students to be college ready, to know how to investigate answers to complex problems. As such, we teach skills aligned to David Conley’s five Key Cognitive Strategies (KCS). The KCS's are skills that are found in every discipline, in every classroom at UAMA; Problem Formation, Research, Interpretation, Communication, Precision. All course outcomes are the Key Cognitive Strategies, presented from the lens of the specific academic discipline. Everything we do is to improve our students’ literacy and problem solving skills (KCS). For example, the content ( Their Eyes Were Watching God , food webs, Civil Rights era, solving equations) is used to teach those skills. The best way to have students practice these skills is through projects in which students are asked to practice solving problems. Five-Week Project Unit UAMA utilizes a school-wide planning tool, the Five Week-Unit Project. In order to align our instructional work and ensure that all students are receiving clearly articulated and consistent expectation in all classes, all teachers will organize their instruction around a 5-week unit/project instruction model. The 5-week time frame is consistent with the school wide marking period calendar and is designed so that students have to produce a final KCS aligned deliverable (project) at the end of the five weeks. Each teacher has access to a personal Google Doc account containing the Five-Week Project Unit Planner. This new planner is divided into two sections, the Project Outline, and the Daily Pacing Calendar. First teachers must fill out the Planner articulating the Project Description - the deliverable students will be responsible for at the end of the 5-week unit. Deliverables are rigorous, KCS aligned products that students will create utilizing the core skill(s) they have practiced over the course of the unit. Teachers should structure each deliverable such that students must; 1) Read from a set of rigorous resources provided by the teacher; 2) Write about what they are reading/processing, including opinions/conclusions they are forming; 3) Defend a position or a conclusion that they have developed in the course of their work. Deliverables are not, tests, quizzes, or worksheets. Once a teacher has articulated a Project Description and the relevant KCS that students will need to practice to complete the deliverable, they will then use the Daily Pacing Calendar to articulate mini lessons for the five weeks, using a modified workshop model. The expectation of the modified workshop model is that students are given at least 30 minutes of independent class time to practice the KCS skills that they will be responsible for in completing a proficient deliverable at the end of the 5-week unit. This means that as a general rule teacher mini lessons should not run longer ten minutes. The focus here is to make students responsible for mastering their KCS skill proficiency. In order to master those skills students need time to independently practice them. If teachers are lecturing, students aren’t practicing. Reading and Data Conferencing Our students learn best when they can set goals, practice the skills to achieve the goals, and then review their progress. As such we employ conferencing as a regular part of classroom instruction. In Reading Conferences, students set goals around their own reading; data conferences have students setting goals around their most recent Regents-based or unit assessment. Teachers plan a calendar of 10-minute conferences in which students review evidence of their progress. Classes conclude with a 10 minutes “share out” of what was learned, run by students. In content conferences, students come to the conference prepared to share a content challenge with which they are grappling. In the conference setting the teacher supports the student in identifying ways to overcome that challenge and then goal setting so that the next time the student has a similar challenge he is equipped to independently persevere. The fifth class assignment for many teachers will be a “Need to Read” class, which employs reading conferences and sustained silent reading. For Regents review courses, teachers are expected to conference with 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  students around performance on mock Regents exams as well as aspects of the content that are presenting challenges. In both of these types of classes, teachers design short mini-lessons to address the learning needs as articulated through the available data and support with direct differentiated conferencing. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. UAMA special student populations includes, 22% of students with IEP's, 33% who are level 1's in reading and math, 31% who are level 2's in reading and math, and 1% who receive support for temporary housing. UAMA has one ICT section per grade to support our IEP students. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. By building and making certain that these structures support student learning and are meeting students needs, we are addressing the six elements in the Framework For Great Schools. Our largest area of progress has been the development and implementation of our Bard Academy to further rigorous instruction. This initiative has ensured that all of our classes align to making sure our students are prepared for the rigorous demands of early college work at the start of 11th grade. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 13K350 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 221 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 39 20 6 4 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 6 6 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) 7 School Composition (2017-18) 86.0% % Attendance Rate 81.0% % Reduced Lunch 3.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 18.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 13.25 8% 48% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 80% 67% 75.5% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups - Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 100 122 76.5% 5.4% 22.6% 77.4% 0.5% 1.4% 0 60% 9 N/A N/A 61% 71% 62.6% 4% N/A No Yes N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Economically Disadvantaged YES ALL STUDENTS YES 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: -2017/18 school years marks the third year in a row that we achieved a graduation rate of at least 80%. - 100% of the staff meets weekly to participate in professional development and curriculum development opportunities including the analysis of student performance data and student work. - 100% of the staff has incorporated the use of the five-week calendar, developing KCS project based instruction, Need-to-Read conferencing protocols, Skedula, and what we learn from the Blue Engine Partnership as they work to increase to increase the rigor in classroom instruction and support the development of students’ critical thinking skills. Needs: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  - The school and staff need to continue to work on establishing systems and routines to analyze formative and summative data to inform classroom instruction. - The school and staff needs to continue to work on providing rigorous instructional experiences across all content areas and incorporating differentiation strategies to specifically support our students earning college ready scores on math Regents assessments and those reading below grade level. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 the school will improve pass rates of the Common Core Algebra, Global Studies, and ELA Regents exam by 10%, the school will improve credit accumulation in all grades by 10%, the school improve the four year graduation rate by 10%. We will aso increase the college ready performance for students taking all math Regents assessments. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Teacher collaboration that focuses on student work and proficiency through grade level data meetings, content area and school-wide meetings will be used to plan and assess student activities in order to meet their needs and help students meet performance goals Professional Development opportunities based on staff needs and interest, with a focus on using data to inform instruction, differentiated instruction to support English Language Learners, Students with Disabilities, and students reading below grade level as measured by Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) reading assessment Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All Students September 2018 – June 2019 Principal, All Teachers All Students Principal September 2018 – June 2019 Instructional support of student progress such as tutorial and Regents prep will occur in all classes, Advisory, and during after-school and/or Saturday opportunities. All Students September 2018 – June 2019 Principal, All Teachers Students will be supported by a variety of strategies including the use of Pupil Path, a parent site of our website, and conduct parent workshops. All Students and the parents/guardians September 2018 – June 2019 Principal, All Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. At UAMA parents have 24/7 access to our website and their students individualized IO Education account. The is a valuable resource that gives parents access to all of their students grades, assignments, attendance and assessment results. It also clearly outlines all NYS, NYCDOE, and UAMA graduation requirements. We also provide through our parent coordinator monthly IO tutorials for parents to teach them how the technology works, how they can access it, how and when we communicate directly to them through the different on-line platforms, (e.g. texting, email, instant message, website announcement page. Parents also have direct access to our parent coordinator, our guidance team and members of the administration to address any concerns that they may have. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  Staff will need time for participating in staff development, planning for implementation of strategies in instruction, providing tutorial for students, and supplemental instructional resources such as releases Regent exams and technology. Teachers be provided per-session, resources will be used fro Blue Engine support. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Teachers will use mid-point benchmarks ( Regents exam, credit accumulations, daily attendance). Selected benchmark will be administered and graded by the end of January 2018. Assessment results will be analyzed by the entire staff to inform instructional decisions as part of the Cycle of Continuous Improvement. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Regents exam pass rates, Student Credit Accumulation, Daily Attendance percentage by school and individual period. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strengths: - All students are assigned to a Need-to-Read advisor teacher who conferences with them at least twice a month. - Common lessons are used in all Need-to-Read sections that focus on a Goal Setting, Organizational Skills, Problem Solving, Public Speaking, and Growth Mindset. · Needs: - The school and staff needs work in adopting Skedula as a tool for establish systems and routines to analyze trends in student attendance, tardies, red pass, detention and suspension data. The school and staff needs to continue to work on identifying and addressing the behaviors that most commonly lead to poor academic outcomes, detention, and suspensions. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 90% of teachers will achieve Effective in Domain 2d and 3b as measured by observation reports and snapshots centered on the Danielson Framework (rubrics) for teacher effectiveness. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) The school leader communicates school goals that are timely, transparent and available to all stake holders. All Teachers September 2018-June 2019 School leaders encourage the staff to use systems that are dynamic, adaptive, interconnected and lead to the through analyses of outcomes. All Teachers September 2018-June 2019 School leaders espouse and support practices in areas that support student progress and achievement and which include feedback loops and examples of best practice directly connected to student achievement. All Teachers September 2018-June 2019 All Staff All Staff All Staff Teacher leaders and administrators engage in learning walks that build and support observational skills and a common language around instruction . All Teachers September 2018-June 2019 All Staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. At UAMA parents have 24/7 access to our website and their students individualized IO Education account. The is a valuable resource that gives parents access to all of their students grades, assignments, attendance and assessment results. It also clearly outlines all NYS, NYCDOE, and UAMA graduation requirements. We also provide through our parent coordinator monthly IO tutorials for parents to teach them how the technology works, how they can access it, how and when we communicate directly to them through the different on-line platforms, (e.g. texting, email, instant message, website announcement page. Parents also have direct access to our parent coordinator, our guidance team and members of the administration to address any concerns that they may have. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Staff will need time for participating in staff development and analysis of student behavior data, planning for implementation of strategies, and providing behavior support structures for students. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. · The staff will compile records and documentation in Skedula including Academic Performance, Attendance, Tardies, Detention, and Suspension data for the Fall 2016 semester. · In January 2018, the staff will review the documentation and identify the trends and behaviors that most commonly lead to Red Pass, Detention, and Suspension · The staff will determine the best strategies to support students who have received multiple red passes, detention, and suspensions to develop a plan to support students in making positive choices. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Skedula which includes all Academic Performance Records, Attendance Records, Tardie Records, Detention Records, and Suspension data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by SOP(s) Addressed X X X X using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. · Strengths: -The entire staff meets weekly to participate in professional development and curriculum development opportunities including the analysis of student performance data and student work so to effectively update their Five-Week Planners. - All new teachers are working with mentors. -The entire staff have participated in staff development and have incorporated the use of binders, school agendas, the Five-Week Planner, Academic and Content vocabulary, Socratic Seminars, Project Based Learning, and Common Core Aligned KCS Units as they work to increase to increase the rigor in classroom instruction and support the development of students’ critical thinking skills. · Needs: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  -The school needs to continue to work on establishing systems and routines to support teachers in the analysis of formative and summative data to inform classroom instruction. -Teachers need to continue to participate in staff development opportunities in providing rigorous instructional experiences across all content areas and incorporating differentiation strategies to support English Language Learners, Students with Disabilities, and students reading Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 80% of teachers will show improvement in structures for professional collaborations and inquiry to further enhance their capacity and leadership. The use of student transcripts documenting student progress, team meeting minutes, agendas and feedback forms will measure this growth. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teacher collaboration that focuses on student work and proficiency through grade level data meetings, content area and school-wide meetings wil be used to plan and assess student activities in order to meet their needs and help students meet performance goals. All Staff Professional Development opportunities based on staff needs and interest, with a focus on using data to inform instruction, differentiated instruction to support English Language Learners, Students with Disabilities, and students reading below grade level as measured by Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) reading assessment. All Staff Teachers will be provided opportunities in building leadership capacity through professional development and collaboration. All Staff Teachers will be provided an opportunities to participate in classroom inter visitations. All Staff Principal Principal Principal Principal September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. At UAMA parents have 24/7 access to our website and their students individualized IO Education account. The is a valuable resource that gives parents access to all of their students grades, assignments, attendance and assessment results. It also clearly outlines all NYS, NYCDOE, and UAMA graduation requirements. We also provide through our parent coordinator monthly IO tutorials for parents to teach them how the technology works, how they can access it, how and when we communicate directly to them through the different on-line platforms, (e.g. texting, email, instant message, website announcement page. Parents also have direct access to our parent coordinator, our guidance team and members of the administration to address any concerns that they may have. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  Staff will need time for participating in staff development and leadership opportunities in addition to time for collaborating and planning implementation of instructional strategies. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. UAMA will use the January Regents administration and Semester 1 credit accumulation as our mid-point benchmarks for monitoring student progress. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The specific instruments that we will use to measure our progress will be student scores from January Regents administration and students transcripts documenting their semester one course pass rates. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. · Strengths: - The principal meets with the entire staff weekly to present professional development and curriculum development opportunities including the analysis of student performance data and student work. - The principal meets one-on-one with each staff member each Marking Period to support their instructional practice. - The principal conducts formal and informal classroom walk-throughs and provides feedback in accordance with the Danielson Framework. - The principal have The entire staff have participated in staff development and have incorporated the use of the Five-Week Planner, Academic and Content vocabulary, Socratic Seminars, Project Based Learning, and Common Core Aligned KCS Units as they work to increase to increase the rigor in classroom instruction and support the development of students’ critical thinking skills. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  · Needs: - The principal needs to continue to work on establishing systems and routines to support teachers in the analysis of formative and summative data to inform classroom instruction. - The principal needs to increase the frequency of informal and formal walk-throughs to support teachers in their instructional practice. - The principal needs to continue to design staff development opportunities for teachers in providing rigorous instructional experiences across all content areas and incorporating differentiation strategies to support English Language Learners, Students with Disabilities, and students reading below grade level. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the administration will show a 10% increase in the frequency of classroom walk-throughs and observations. This will be demonstrated by providing feedback to teachers in addition to increasing staff development opportunities to support teachers in their instructional practice. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) The administration will meet weekly with staff during Accountable Community time and provide professional development opportunities for all staff. All Staff The administration will increase the frequency of informal and formal walk-throughs and providing feedback to teachers. All Staff The administration will provide opportunities for teachers to build leadership capacity and to collaborate as an entire staff All Staff The administration will reflect on implementation and identify additional supports needed by teachers. All Staff Principal Principal Principal Principal September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. At UAMA parents have 24/7 access to our website and their students individualized IO Education account. The is a valuable resource that gives parents access to all of their students grades, assignments, attendance and assessment results. It also clearly outlines all NYS, NYCDOE, and UAMA graduation requirements. We also provide through our parent coordinator monthly IO tutorials for parents to teach them how the technology works, how they can access it, how and when we communicate directly to them through the different on-line platforms, (e.g. texting, email, instant message, website announcement page. Parents also have direct access to our parent coordinator, our guidance team and members of the administration to address any concerns that they may have. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The administration will need time to visit classrooms and to meet with the staff as an entire group and individually. The administration will need time to design and present professional development opportunities as well as time to reflect on implementation and identify additional supports needed by teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● The principal will compile records and documentation including agenda and minutes from Accountable Communities meetings, walk-throughs and other professional development opportunities. ● During one on one meetings with the principal, the principal will provide feedback to support teachers and their goals for their professional growth ● The principal will ask for feedback and reflection from the staff to determine their areas of need and support from the principal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Agenda and minutes from Accountable Communities meetings, Advance Observation Reports and Notes Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X X x X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. ● Strengths: o 50% of students had at least one parent or guardian attend the Fall Conferences. o Teachers and other staff make phone calls home on a regular basis to keep parents/guardians updated with their students’ progress. o In addition to regularly scheduled report cards, progress reports are mailed home every six weeks to inform parents/guardians updated with their students’ progress. ● Needs: o The school and staff needs to continue to work on established systems and routines to create a welcoming environment for families such as providing parent training on graduation requirements, preparing for college, and using systems to check student grades and attendance. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  o The school and staff needs to continue to work on using multiple ways to communicate with families through School Messenger. o The school needs to conduct a Needs Assessment to get feedback about the best ways to encourage and increase participation from more families. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will increase parent involvement in school wide activities and functions by 10 % as measured by analysis of data-oriented information. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All parents/guardians will attend either the Fall or Spring Conferences. All Families Some parents/guardians will participate in a Home Visit All Families All parents/guardians will participate in at least one parent training session on topics including graduation requirements, preparing for college, and using systems to check student grades and attendance. All Families School materials and meetings will be translated and made accessible to all families in their primary language. All Families September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 All Staff All Staff Partnership Coordinator, Principal Partnership Coordinator, Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The Center for Supportive Schools Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Staff will need time for scheduling and conducting parent meetings and training, time to prepare students to present during Student Led Conferences, collecting data on parent participation and survey feedback, and time to train staff in the use of School Messenger. Resources include three guidance counselors, the Blue Engine instructional team, and Pupil Path Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● The staff will compile records and documentation such as sign in sheets, calendars, and meeting handouts during the Fall Semester. ● In January 2018, the staff will review the documentation and determine which families have participated in a school event. ● The staff will determine the best strategies to reach out to families during the Spring Semester who have not participated in a school event. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Skedula Outreach Records, Guidance Counselor Week Outreach Documentation (Skedula), Sign-in Sheets from Parent Conferences Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students not reading on grade level, students not passing the course, English Language Learners, Students with Disabilities Mathematics Students not reading on grade level, students not passing the course, English Language Learners, Students with Disabilities Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) We will continue to support a program, “Need To Read,” our school-wide reading intervention program. During a common period, all students are designated to classrooms where the expectation is to read. The teachers are trained by our English teacher who helped launch the program, on how to properly assess and conference with students. Through the conferencing model, student voice is the primary focus. Our Mathematics department assesses each student and then creates a common time when at least one of the teachers can work on specific skills with the student. Furthermore, the Math department has dedicated time to transition to project based Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Since the “Need To Read” initiative requires every student in the school to have that particular class at the same time, we had to be creative with how we constructed our program. We were able to find a common time where the core teachers on all four grade levels could teach at the same time without it affecting contractual stipulations. Due to this fact, we generally keep the groups under 15 students. Students work in both small and large group instruction. Manipulative’s are used to aid in understanding various concepts. Students tutor other students in mathematical concepts. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) The “Need to Read” intervention is provided during the school day. In addition we offer five forty-five minute periods of ELA AIS support during the week. This is done before school, during the student’s lunch and after school. This time is in addition to the State mandated weekly minutes of ELA instruction. We offer five forty-five minute periods of Mathematics AIS support during the week. This is done before school, during the student’s lunch and after school. This time is in addition to the State mandated weekly minutes of Mathematics instruction. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  Science Students not reading on grade level, students not passing the course, English Language Learners, Students with Disabilities Social Studies Students not reading on grade level, students not passing the course, English Language Learners, Students with Disabilities At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students with chronic attendance/tardies, multiple red passes, multiple detentions or suspensions learning which allows for reading and writing skills to be incorporated into the Mathematics environment. There are various ways we provide Science intervention. Our Science department assesses each student and then creates a common time when at least one of the teachers can work on specific skills with the student. The students also get to engage in experiment based projects. There are various ways we provide Social Studies intervention. Our Social Studies department assesses each student and then creates a common time when at least one of the teachers can work on specific skills with the student. School counselors will provide guidance and crisis Counseling services, to all students especially SWD, LEP, Black, Hispanic and Economically Disadvantaged students in grades9-12. Students work in both small and large group instruction. Each Science class has a lab component where the students get to perform hands on experiments. This type of learning further brings a real world connection to their lives. We offer five forty-five minute periods of Science AIS support during the week. This is done before school, during the student’s lunch and after school. This time is in addition to the State mandated weekly minutes of Science instruction. We offer five forty-five minute periods of Social Studies AIS support during the week. This is done before school, during the student’s lunch and after school. This time is in addition to the State mandated weekly minutes of Social Studies instruction. The service is offered on an as needed basis before, during and after school. Students work in both small and large group instruction. Various reading strategies are used to improve comprehension. Text mapping is performed in order to show student how to approach various types of texts. The service is offered in English and Spanish. Students are assisted in learning how to deal with various personal issues including school, friends, family, current events, etc. This service will identify emotional, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  social and neurological factors that impede on student performance and provide prescriptive measures that at risk students need by suggesting additional student support services. The school psychologist will offer clinical services, agency referrals, and educational, social and personal services to at risk students including student in the SWD, LEP, Black, Hispanic and Economically Disadvantaged subgroups. We have partnered with an organization, Interborough Development and Consultation Center. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We currently have 3 students that have been identified for 2018/2019 school year as living in temporary housing. Our goal is to support them academically and provide them with supplies that they might need to ensure that they have a successful school year. They will also have access to counseling provided by our partner organization, Interborough. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  We plan to provide support to ensure their academic success by:  Purchase a backpack for each student in temporary housing  Purchase supplies to go in each backpack for every student in temporary housing for the beginning of both semesters. This will include supplies such as Pencils, Pens, Notebooks, Calculators, and Dictionaries etc.  Purchase clothing such as t-shirt, sweat shirt, pants, skirt depending on the needs  Provide a designated point person, one of our guidance counselors to follow up on a weekly bases to ensure that they are able to get to school on time based on where they are housed, maintaining current contact information as they tend to move around a lot and provide any type of support such as counseling or academic intervention as needed Providing any need counseling needed for their students and their families with our guidance Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● Annually UAMA engages in a spring hire season that includes: o Attending DOE Teacher Recruitment Fairs o Conducting a series of rigorous two day hiring vetting interviews o Profession Development for the Hiring Committee o Returning Teachers Submit Preference Sheets for their upcoming years assignment 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Informal and Formal observations: Formal observations will have a narrative that clearly describes the lesson from bell to bell, including the classroom environment, seating configuration, tone and clear recommendations and commendations, that are aligned to CCLS/ Danielson, and data. Informal’s will be snapshots of a particular segment in the lesson that can be anywhere between 5 – 15 minutes, and can turn into a forma if necessary. Teachers with areas of concern may receive a rating on their informal. Weekly Teacher Coaching Meetings: All teachers participate in weekly coaching meetings so to best promote best practices and differentiate our teacher support. Each meeting will focus on exploring three data points:  % of students who perform Proficient or higher on weekly deliverables   student attendance for each section teacher outreach (as measured by % of students with documented outreach) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  Regular tracking of these data point will allow us to explore patterns that will help us to study how our students perform and how well we support them. Amy will email each teachers of their scheduled meeting time. Please come prepared to discuss the above mentioned data points for each of your sections. Teacher Log of Assistance: Frequent Feedback is a must. At UAMA teachers will have access to an individualized – on-line Log of Assistance where they will get weekly feedback from and administrator in a form that is memorialized. Teachers can also include professional development opportunities that they initiate that take place out of the building. At the end of the year meeting each teacher is given a signed copy of the year long Log of Assistance. Common Planning Time for Teacher Teams Every teacher has common planning time for Content and Grade Teams. It is up to the team members to enact the structures that will ensure they meet the team goals. See ‘Team Meeting Time’under Curriculum & Instruction for additional guidance. PD Workshops & Staff Meetings There will be monthly staff meetings. Teachers will also have the opportunity to participate in professional development classes that the administration and/or teachers will conduct. These meetings will be designed to meet the needs of teachers focusing on best ritual and routines, help with KCSs, technical assistance with IO Education, exploring differentiated lesson plan development, and better understanding what literacy is and how to better approach it in your classroom. Also, Urban Assembly will run monthly and bi-monthly professional development sessions that teachers are encouraged to attend. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Within the Leadership Cabinet made up of teachers and administrators, the Instructional Committee and the Assessments And Data Committee are tasked with the responsibility of leading all instructional initiatives for teachers, lead weekly PD’s, Support teams Need-to-Read initiatives, ensure alignment between the 5-Week Planner, Skedula, and Project Rubrics, and coordinating schedules and PD for Regents & Mock Regents, DRP assessments. Adjustments in instruction are made based off of weekly student performance as recorded in Skedula. The teacher members of these teams meet with their colleagues in grade and department teams to solicit feedback and gain suggestions. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column B Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local $157,798.00 $16,979.00 $53,724.00 $0. $0. $0. $2,310,266.00 X X X N/A N/A N/A X Section Reference(s) See Action Plan See Action Plan See Action Plan N/A N/A N/A See Action Plan 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG or SIF funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 13K350, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. UAMA will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49 School-Parent Compact (SPC)  School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template 13K350], in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? In 2018-19 school year, for the first time The Center for Supportive Schools will implement their Peer Group Connection (PGC) program. PGC is an evidence-based program that supports students’ successful transitions into high school by tapping into the power of older students to create a nurturing environment for incoming students. Through this mentoring program Juniors and seniors will mentor freshmen sophomores around our College for all, Advance Placement, and early college opportunities.  Peer Group Connection will continue to support social and emotional learning, school engagement, and, in turn, daily attendance  Advisory will target support for students with disciplinary, academic, and attendance challenges with a targeted focus on 10th grade students who are graduates of the PGC program and may need additional support services  Academic tutoring will provide 1-1 and small group support to provide personalized academic support as well  as PM School offered in all Regents subject areas Success Mentoring (provided by staff, Americorps and TLP staff) will provide individualized support for students to address chronic absenteeism  Arts and youth development programming will engage students, promoting attendance  The STH/Foster Care grant provided by Children’s Village will provide students in temporary housing with additional resources including counseling and mental health services 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound.  School will provide academic intervention supports for at least 30 weeks for at least 3 days per week by June 2019. School will provide enrichment programs for at least 30 weeks for at least 3 days per week by June 2019.   25% of participants will participate in a community service project by June 2019.  Community members will be invited to participate in two events by June 2019.  40 family members will attend one workshop per year and 90% of Building Family workshop attendees will rate it “good” or “excellent” by June 2019.  15 hours per week of expanded learning time will be provided by June 2019.  At least 45% of regular attendees will increase their math, ELA, and science skills through projects based learning in a supportive learning environment.  65% of regular attendees will increase attendance, school engagement and behavior by June 2019. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? The Center of Supportive Schools will work on helping us expanding the early college opportunities in the arts and the provide the necessary supports to ensure our students success. This will include supporting our parent coordinator in implementing monthly information sessions for parents and families on what students are achieving in the early college work and how to mentor their students progress using the on-line tool IO Education. They will also support us in organizing partners and delivering ELT opportunities that give students enrichment in both their academics and the arts. By providing wraparound supports for students and families and making the school a place where students are actively engaged and excited to be, students will be encouraged to attend school every day and will be met with the supports they need to be successful. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal Center of Supportive Schools ELT All Students Center of Supportive Schools Center of Supportive Schools Attendance Supports Family Engagement Students with open 407's and students who are chronically late or absent All Students All students will be programmed for an ELT opportunity Our CBO Director and Parent Coordinator will meet weekly and develop logs of outreach and support Our CBO Director and Parent Coordinator will develop a calendar of monthly opportunities 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment for parent meetings and information sessions Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 65% of regular attendees will increase attendance, school engagement and behavior by June 2019. Attendance Supports All 9th graders, all 10th graders and selected 11th and/or 12th graders CSS Peer Group Connection (PGC) School will provide enrichment programs for at least 30 weeks for at least 3 days per week by June 2019. Community School CBO budget Expanded Learning Time 275 students The Leadership Program Expanded Learning Programs TBD 25% of participants will participate in a community service project by June 2019. School will provide enrichment programs for at least 30 weeks for at least 3 days per week by June 2019. 15 hours per week of expanded learning time will be provided by June 2019. Community School CBO budget for The Leadership Program Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside X 21st Century SIG Grant School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  2. 3. 4. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 1. The full-time Community School Director (CSD) was hired in partnership with school leadership and the SLT. The CSD is responsible for the day-to-day management of the community school strategy. The CSD is a "community organizer,” facilitating and providing leadership for the collaborative process of developing a continuum of services for children, families, and community members. The CSD drives development of community school action plans and planning for sustainability. The CSD tracks the school’s progress against performance goals, reviews school data, supports program evaluation activities, and manages partnerships. The CSD will ensure that the community school strategy is implemented at exceptional levels of quality with full support, buy-in, and regular communication with stakeholders across the school community. Specific position responsibilities will include: • Build and maintain relationships with administration, faculty, staff, students, parents, and community partners • Organize and expand upon the membership of the Community School Team (CST) to include diverse school community stakeholders and CBOs • Conduct a needs assessment process, including: reviewing school and student-level data; conducting focus groups with parents, students, faculty, staff, administrators, and community partners; and reviewing and/or conducting school climate and culture survey at key times throughout the school year to inform continuous improvement • Conduct a community asset assessment to identify viable partnerships that can meet the needs of students and families of the school community, including ongoing partnership evaluation (including new partnerships with Children’s Village, Americorps, the CATCH program and more) • Recruit and develop partnership agreements with people and community organizations willing to offer programs and services for students and families at the school in accordance with identified needs, such as new health services for students including vaccinations, sexual health, support services and more • Identify evidence and research-based practices and/or partnerships that address priority areas for the community school strategy, which may include but are not limited to: Parent/Family Engagement; Community Engagement; Youth Development; Academic Rigor and Instructional Practices; Health and Mental Health; Tutoring; After school programming; Mentoring; and Early Childhood • Develop, maintain, and publicize a schedule of programs and expanded learning activities offered at the school 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  • Identify needs of chronically absent students, apply interventions, and track and monitor impact of interventions including leading a weekly Attendance Team with key stakeholders • Collect and monitor program implementation data and student data for each partnership that allow easy data analysis and interaction by school stakeholders 2. The Student Sorter will be used on a daily, weekly, and monthly basis to identify and connect students (both subgroups and individuals) in need of personalized/individualized supports. Prevention initiatives and intervention initiatives will be tracked in the Student Sorter and this data will be analyzed regularly, in partnership with the CST and other key school stakeholders, to evaluate effectiveness and to implement new strategies as needed.  Streamlined referral processes will be implemented to ensure that school stakeholders know when and how to refer students and families in need of additional personalized supports that emerge throughout the school year. A tracking tool will also provide a way to ensure that referrals are followed up on and that services are delivered in accordance with the needs presented.  Partner programs will collaborate with teachers and others involved in instructional programming and regular points of engagement will be implemented throughout the year to ensure a cohesive instructional approach within and outside of the regular school day.  3. In partnership with the principal, the CSD will form and subsequently convene monthly meetings of a Community School Team (CST) whose membership will include: members of the School Leadership Team (SLT), other key school staff and/or faculty, key staff from other partner CBOs, parents, and students. Through this meeting, issues will be regularly communicated to and discussed by the group. The CSD will also work with the Parent Coordinator and identified parent leaders to define and implement strategic initiatives to better engage parents in their child’s education and support the community school. Planned initiatives designed to support authentic parent engagement include:  Monthly parent workshops through The Leadership Program  Monthly positive parent outreach -- parents of Achievement Mentoring mentees will receive specific positive progress updates from mentors on at least a monthly basis. 4. The principal, CSD and other members of the Student Success Team will meet for one period on a weekly basis to review the Student Sorter, using the meeting agenda protocol recommended by NYCDOE. During this meeting, the team will review attendance trends and specific student cases to identify and implement next steps and interventions. If questions arise about Student Sorter data, the CSD will serve as the school’s liaison to New Visions’ to address questions and build capacity within the school around Student Sorter proficiency. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 1. Partners include: 1. The Leadership Program CSD focus areas for the 18-19 school year include: (1) decreasing chronic absenteeism (2) increasing parent engagement and (3) youth development/social and emotional student supports. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  2. The Community School Team will include: principal, parent leaders, teachers, CSD, representatives from The Leadership Program, and other community partners. A meeting will be provided prior to each meeting via email to all participants. Meetings will begin with a team-building “check-in” and proceed to review progress on community school goals. Meeting structures will be implemented (such as pair share, small group activities, etc.) to ensure equity of voice in providing feedback and input. Each meeting will end with time for reflection on the meeting, identifying “takeaways” and an email will be sent to the group by the CSD recapping the outcomes and next steps identified in the meeting. 3. The Student Sorter will be used on a daily, weekly, and monthly basis to identify and connect students (both subgroups and individuals) in need of personalized/individualized supports. Prevention initiatives and intervention initiatives will be tracked in the Student Sorter and this data will be analyzed regularly, in partnership with the CST and other key school stakeholders, to evaluate effectiveness and to implement new strategies as needed. Partner organizations will also be required to provide monthly reports documenting progress against stated outcomes and these updates will be discussed in monthly check-in meetings with the CSD. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. UAMA will provide an office and supplies to the Community School Director which will give us constant access to them throughout the year. Presently the Community School programs will be implemented within our current schedule and will not require any adjustments. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates.  Peer Group Connection (PGC): October 2018 to June 2019.  Expanded Learning Time activities will start no later than October 2018 and will conclude May 2019. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 13 School Name Urban Assembly School of Music and Art Borough Brooklyn School Number 350 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Paul Thompson Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Teacher/Subject Area Karin Pellinen - Special Ed. Teacher/Subject Area Brian Siu Related-Service Provider Tamara Basaenilova Superintendent Karen Watts Assistant Principal Coach School Counselor Pamela Brathwaite Parent Monique Mornan Parent Coordinator Cecily Zayas Field Support Center Staff Member Tatyana Ulubabova Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 328 Total number of ELLs 6 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 1.83% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The Urban Assembly school of Music and Art uses DRP and Mock Regent Exams to asses early literacy skills of ELLs. The data provides insight in regards to ELLs' individual reading levels and comprehension skills. The DRP also helps the school determine each ELLs reading fluency level, vocabulary comprehension skills, reading for understanding comprehension skills and academic content comprehension skills. the data helps our teachers to differentiate instruction and make instructional modifications for all ELLs. Subject area teachers give students appropriate reading materials and books so that all ELLs can be an active member in their classrooms. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of our program is measured by the ENL teachers observation as well as the students' progress in their content classes. Success is also measured by each students' NYSESLAT scores, DRP scores and mock regent's scores as well. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. What is revealed by the data patterns across proficiency levels is that most of the students score higher in the listening and speaking sections of the NYSESLAT than in reading and writing. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The program created at the Urban Assembly School of Music and Art consist both Push-in and Pull-out services. Due to the low population of the ENL students, the ENL teacher works in the school two out of the five days a week. At Urban Assembly School of Music and Art each class travels together as a group although electives may vary. In order to best serve the students the ENL teacher works closely with the content area teachers by communication with them before, during and after school hours. During Push-in classes the ENL teacher works with students one-on-one and in small groups. Grouping during Pull-out periods is mostly heterogeneous. Groups are formed by grade level for beginning and intermediate students while advance students are grouped by level and their grades vary. Pull-out instruction is data driven and guided by the individual needs of the students working in groups of five students or less. b. TBE program. If applicable. NA c. DL program. If applicable. NA 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The Urban Assembly School of Music and Art ensures that mandated instruction is provided. the Pull-out/Push-in program services students with appropriate amount of time that is mandated. The Urban Assembly School of Music and Art is aware of the ENL Students' levels and needs. All ENL (beginners, intermediates, and advanced) students have one 45 minute of ELA every day. All beginners are seen for the mandated time of 540 minutes a week , intermediates of 360 minutes a week, and advanced students 180 minutes. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The content area subjects are conducted in English. Scaffolding and differentiation are incorporated into all lessons. Guided reading, silent reading, small group instruction, and cooperative learning groups facilitate interdisciplinary and standard based instruction. the ESL teacher pushes in and collaborates with the subject area teacher to provide students with students with modified worksheets/handouts. The ESL teacher works with ELLs in Small groups when needed. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Spanish is an elective available to all students and this is a tool used to evaluate Spanish speaking ELLs in their native language. other ELLs are encourage to read in their native language and are occasionally asked questions in regards to what they are reading. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. A. n/a B. n/a C. These students are given the mandated instructional time D. these students are given the mandated instructional time E. Testing accommodations are made available to ELLs when necessary. Such accommodations include time extension, bilingual glossaries. separate locations and translated written versions of test. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Grade level Materials that are used are appropriate to the students age, grade, level, and English language proficiency. Instructional strategies include but not limited to visual lessons, linking new information, with prior Knowledge, cooperative learning, Modifying Instruction , test, handouts, etc ., and determine key concepts and vocabulary words in reading passages. Students have access to bilingual dictionaries. the school insures that students receive all service mandated on their IEP by having ESL and Special Educators Push-in the classroom or Pull-out students for services. Also, the ESl Specialist, The Special Education Teacher and Classroom Teachers collaborate on what handouts, reading materials and books are appropriate for these particular ELLs. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  In order to meet the needs of our ELL students with disabilities in the least restrictive environment, we incorporate a Push-in and Pull out program where students with disabilities interact and engage in academics with students that do not have disabilities. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA and other core content areas include small group instruction, peer tutoring and differentiation. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For each grade there is a sustained silent reading period being held through the school day. during this time students read a grade/age appropriate book and teachers conduct a 10 minute mini-conference with individual students to assess their reading comprehension skills. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No programs or services for ELLs will be discontinued because our program is successful 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. X-Studio Arts Programs are offered to all students. all student are encouraged to sign up for the x-Studio program . 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Differentiated worksheets and reading handouts, post-its. over head projectors, the smart board, computers, ipads, electronic translators, bilingual dictionaries help to support ELLs 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Student are encouraged to use native language and English dictionaries. they are also encouraged to read in both English and in their native language 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Resources and support for ELLs are modified when needed and instruction for all ELLs are Differentiated. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Differentiated worksheets and reading handouts, post-its. over head projectors, the smart board, computers, ipads, electronic translators, bilingual dictionaries help to support ELLs 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). There are parent/student orientations with ESL teacher and the Principal to help assist newly enrolled ELLs. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish is offered to all students as an elective. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All staff members at UAMA attend various professional development workshops and in-school activities. The main form of professional development focuses on differentiating instruction in the classroom for all students. Teachers are also given the opportunity to attend professional development that focuses on particular content areas and differentiation in these areas. Support personnel are also given various professional development opportunities on how to support the students both inside and outside of the classroom. In addition to outside workshops, and informal school based professional development opportunities, school days that are designated to professional development provide workshops that focus on differentiation on all school levels. All professional development is based on David Conley's Five Key Cognitive Strategies which are Common Core aligned. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. NA Professional Development is provided to teaches weekly through 3 main blocks, 1. 75 minutes of Monday PD, 2. 45 minutes of Tuesday PD, and 3. 45 Minutes team meetings 2 days a week. Each meeting is document with meeting notices and agendas are kept. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our bilingual staff members conduct phone calls to determine what a parent may require. if our bilingual staff members are not able to translate or interpret we will then contact the department of education's translation services. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parental Involvement includes an ELL parent meeting, Parent-Teacher Conferences, new ELL Parent Orientation, Individual parent meetings and phone calls. parent are encouraged to contact the ESL teacher at any time for assistance or with any concerns. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. NA 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Paul Thompson, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Urban Assembly Music & Art School DBN: 13k350 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Paul Thompson Title Principal Josephine Tucker Assistant Principal Cecily Zayas Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Tamara Basaenilova Coach Coach Pamela Brathwaite School Counselor Karen Watts Tatyana Ulubabova Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Brroklyn North Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/30/17 1/1/17 10/30/17 1/1/01 10/30/15 1/1/01 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: School Name: Superintendent: The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70 
