2018-19 RISE SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (R-CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 17K352 School Name: EBBETS FIELD MIDDLE SCHOOL Principal: JEANNE ROWE 2018-19 CEP-RISE 1  Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles Section 3: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 4: Rise School Narrative Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Community School Partnerships Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 10: Title I Program Information Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP-RISE 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Ebbets Field Middle School 352 17K352 331700010352 6, 7, 8 School Number (DBN): 46 McKeever Place; Brooklyn, NY 11225 718-941-5097 718-284-7973 Phone Number: Jeanne Rowe Fax: JRowe2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Community School CBO: Principal: Community School Director: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Email Address: KayanSoverall JeanneRowe AndreaOrr Ms. Gill Baptise Margarita Quinones SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Patricia Wright District Information Geographical District: 17 Clarence G. Ellis Superintendent: 1224 Park Place; Brooklyn NY 11213 Superintendent’s Office Address: Cellis3@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-221-4372 Phone Number: 718-221-4326 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 17, 18, 20, 22 FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Cheryl Watson Harris Executive Director: 56-19 Flatlands Avenue; Brooklyn, NY 11236 2018-19 CEP-RISE 3  mdegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-759-4868 Phone Number: 718-630-1634 Fax: 2018-19 CEP-RISE 4  Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles The Objective To guide, support and accelerate the early progress demonstrated by the schools graduating out of the Renewal program, as Rising Schools of Excellence (Rise), with a compelling theory of action, clear strategy for sustainment, targeted individualized supports, continued accountability, gradual release of responsibility, such that they independently accelerate their growth trajectory. Background Rise Schools have demonstrated: ● ● they have the will and conditions in place to accelerate student growth and meet school improvement benchmarks. they have the capacity to lead/implement a school improvement strategy. Rise Schools have seen some gains1 across multiple measures including graduation rates, college readiness, state test scores and attendance. As a result, these schools will fully transition out of the Renewal Schools program at the end of the 2017-2018 SY and continue under the guidance of the Office of Field Support, in partnership with the Office of School Support and Supervision. 1All Rise Schools met at least 67% of their benchmarks, are not on the State’s Priority list, and have demonstrated a sustainable school improvement structure that will allow them to build on their progress. Six Rise Keys for Continued Improvement 1. Strengthen the Instructional Core 2. Strengthen Instructional Leadership Capacity 3. 4. Apply a tiered approach to student intervention 5. Promote a positive, inclusive school environment for students, staff, parents and Improve Data Driven Practices community partners Increase monitoring and accountability 6. Theory of Action If the NYC Department of Education provides customized supports to Rise schools and principals designed around the “Six Rise School Keys for continued improvement” then, Rise principals and their teams will have the tools and resources to accelerate outcomes for ALL students and increase students’ access to an excellent and equitable education. Structure of the Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) The Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) will serve as the organizing and overarching document for each Rise school and will be directly aligned and developed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, and Strong Schools, Strong Communities, including the following: ● Rise Benchmarks: please refer to the 2018-19 Rise benchmarks provided to your school. ● Establishing an overarching summative vision aligned with elements of the Framework for Great Schools and documenting key areas of celebration and Rise through analysis of assessments and by envisioning what the desired outcome for each school will be at the end of the School Rise process. ● Setting mid-year point benchmarks that create the path for improvement by focusing on desired outcomes and goals. In this way, the plan will be mapped to the overarching summative vision. In addition to the five discrete goals formed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, each school will create an action plan. ● Transformation into a community school in order to increase student and family access to physical and mental health services and other social-emotional supports made available in or near the school. ● Expanded learning opportunities for all students, including additional instruction provided during afterschool and/or summer programming provided in collaboration with community partners. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 5  ● Intensive professional development for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and instruction aligned to the Next Generation Learning Standards (NGLS) and to support staff in effectively responding to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of all students. ● Additional, focused strategies to increase parent and family engagement. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Information on the Framework for Great Schools and the DTSDE Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and the R-CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 6  The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the American Institute of Research (AIR) Needs Assessment, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools – they call it a Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All Priority and Focus Schools and Focus 2018-19 CEP-RISE 7  Districts must use the new tool; and districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Education Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:  a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 8 a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC)  It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the R-CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the R-CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for R-CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists in every Rise school and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the American Institute of Research (AIR) needs assessment, the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Rise Key and the corresponding statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Discuss and respond to the guiding questions under each Framework element.  Step 5: Revisit your school’s current goals, and strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you have identified, and will let your school community know when you have reached your goal.  Step 6: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Complete the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and the Community School sections.  Step 9: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether strategies and activities outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust practices along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Rise Program Priorities Our Rise Theory of Action (page 4) is drawn from research1 on turnaround schools, the DOE Framework for Great Schools, DTSDE Tenets, and the Quality Review, which suggest that these key priorities have the greatest impact on student achievement. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 9  RISE Keys Priorities 1. Strengthen the Instructional Core 2. Strengthen Instructional Leadership Capacity 3. Improve Data Driven Practices 4. Apply a tiered approach to school support and intervention 5. Promote a positive, inclusive school environment for students, staff, parents and community partners 6. Increase monitoring and accountability  A clear focus aligned to students’ instructional needs, including college and career readiness  Access to common, standards-based curricula for all students, including ELLs and SWDs  Explicit and intentional embedding of culturally responsive Instruction in all content areas  Formative and summative assessments for all students in all grades that are aligned to curricula and produce clear evidence of learning  Tiered approach to teacher professional learning opportunities.  Partnership with families to increase engagement in students’ academic success  Implementation of a coherent vision for school improvement - a vision for leading learning, leading people, leading schools and leading change  Development of a system to support distributive leadership and build the capacity and sustainability of teacher leaders through continuous improvement  Developing leadership competencies, specific to turnaround efforts, including leveraging multiple stakeholders, a commitment to student learning and a sustained pursuit of measurable progress. Strategic allocation of resources to support instructional and professional learning plans and family engagement in leadership opportunities Integrative use of formative and summative assessment tools and practices to target resources and support throughout the year to achieve academic priorities    Ongoing analyses of school-wide and student-level data and adjustments to curricular resources and instructional moves  Prioritization of the use of standards and data to inform teaching and learning    Implementation of a tiered intervention system that engages teacher teams in frequent cycles of progress monitoring and adjustments to address diverse student needs School establishes coherent system, adopted by all to ensure that interventions are effective, differentiated and timely Increased use of teacher teams’ data-driven practices to accelerate student achievement  Clear strategy that establishes social norms within the school community and promotes a culture for learning with clear and high expectations for all students, in partnership with CBOs.  The sustainability of an environment where students feel safe, connected and engaged through practices that are culturally relevant and build their scholarly identity  The development of a whole school approach, in partnership with families, with   specific attention to social, physical and behavioral environments Social emotional learning practices embedded in teaching and learning as aligned to the Collaborative for Academic, Social and Emotional learning (CASEL) competencies and supported by CBOs. School leaders implement effective monitoring systems to ensure that instructional practices and interventions are monitored closely at the classroom, team, and school wide level  Establish effective teacher team practices that ensure teachers are accountable for data findings and set timely and appropriate interventions  Data analysis results in adjustments to the programs and priorities to better service   students Foster positive systems for accountability driven by reflection and action planning Support from district leaders to focus efforts toward results and problem solving actions that lead to turnaround success. 1. Darden/Curry PLE – Turnaround Leadership Competencies and Turnaround Action Shown to Influence Student Achievement 2018-19 CEP-RISE 10  Achievement Network – SY 18-19 Foundations Rubric COSEBOC Standards and Promising Practices for Schools Educating Boys of Color Harvard Graduate School of Education and Harvard Business School: Certificate in School Management and Leadership Learner-Centered Initiatives Multidimensional Principal Performance Rubric Monitoring and Accountability ● Rise schools will be monitored for implementation of the Rise Comprehensive Educational Plan (R+CEP) by Superintendents and Office of Field Support. ● Rise schools will be held accountable for making progress according to annual targets set by the Department of Education, as evidenced by their attainment of named benchmark scores for each annualized key metric. Schools not achieving annual targets by June 2019 are subject to additional oversight and consequences, to be determined at a later date. ● OFS will bring increased oversight and accountability by monitoring FSC supports to schools and ensure that these are aligned with the school’s instructional focus, student and teacher needs, and moving the school toward achieving interim goals. ● OSSS will monitor DSR oversight of all supports to Rise Schools. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 11  Section 3: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Directions: All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP). SLT members’ signatures indicates that they have been consulted with and given the opportunity to provide feedback on the plan and the plan’s alignment with the school-based budget to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Expanded Learning Time, Community School initiative, Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the second column. 2. 3. In the first column, indicate using an “X” if the person is an SLT member. In the third column, record the position and constituent group represented such as staff, parent, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), or other contributor. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 4. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the R-CEP, not approval. 5. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Signature (Blue Ink) Represented *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Community School Director (staff) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two Check if SLT x x X X X Jeanne Rowe Andrea Orr SarondaGill-Baptise MargaritaQuinones na KayanSoverall na na na na 2018-19 CEP-RISE 12  Check if SLT x X X X X X X na na na na na Name Position and Constituent Group Represented members required for high schools) Signature (Blue Ink) Heather Webb Kema Eagle Patricia Wright Celeste Walker Aida Nazario Natache Augustin Valencia Baker Parent Parent Parent Teacher Teacher Parent Teacher Veronica Mullen-Morris Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Ronda Kornegay Tamyra Peterson na na Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor 2018-19 CEP-RISE 13  Section 4: Rise School Narrative In a brief narrative, describe the current state of the Rise school addressing the following and please use existing data, where applicable: 1. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including your school’s mission statement and a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Identify any special student populations that the school has and what their specific needs are. 2. 3. Describe your school’s approach to family engagement and progress made with establishing families as partners in furthering student achievement 4. Describe how your school is leveraging community school partnerships to support progress in elements of the Framework for Great Schools and your Rise Benchmarks and indicate where this has been a challenge. 5. Summarize the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) opportunities that have been offered to your students this year. Ebbets Field Middle School (EFMS) 17K352 serves 174 students in grades 6-8. The school population is comprised of 64.37% Black/African-American, 21.84% Hispanic/Latino, 7.47% Asian, 1.72% Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander, and 4.6% White students. The student body includes 23.56% English language Learners and 28.16% students with disabilities (SWDs). Boys account for 56.32% of the student body and females account for 43.68%. Our average attendance rate for the 2017-2018 school year was 91.2%, which equaled our benchmark of 91.2%. Ebbets Field is built on the field of the former Brooklyn Dodgers, which has historical significance, because it represents the place where Jackie Robinson, through sheer determination and commitment, integrated American baseball, by breaking the color barrier. Armed with this history, the staff and student body of Ebbets Field represents a diverse group of people from all over the world. Each student entering our doors, many of whom hail from different countries and cultures, has the hope of receiving an education that promotes high expectations, and that supports their social and emotional growth, and prepares them for college and career readiness, and it is our mission to provide it. At Ebbets Field, we believe in the simple philosophy that ALL children have the potential and ability to learn. We believe that to be our mission and hold ourselves accountable for supporting students where they are, by providing the necessary supports they need to be successful learners. As a Data Wise school, our entire school regularly reviews student formative and summative assessment data and student work products to determine our strengths, weakness, and immediate next steps for improvement. Adjustments to plans and instruction include providing students with targeted small group instruction via stations and scaffolds, to improve learning outcomes for ALL students. As a Community school, we believe that we MUST support the whole child academically, socially and emotionally. Our motto: Determination + Perseverance + Resilience = SUCCESS, supports our school vision of a school community that is collaboratively built by its staff, students, parents and community, all working collaboratively to ensure the success of every child. We envision a school where students’ and families’ academic and social and emotional needs are met, relationships are strong, and where a melting pot of cultures inspires the growth of individuals and our community. We believe that if we work together with determination, perseverance and resiliency, success is the only option. We strive to create an environment where our students set high expectations for themselves for academic achievement and where they have the opportunity to explore who they are to find their place in society. EFMS offers a number of enrichment activities with the support of our Community Based Organization, New York Edge (NYE) and other community partners such as Turnaround Arts, Bric Museum, Ifetayo Cultural Center, Brooklyn Botanical Gardens, Brooklyn Connections, Peer Group Connections, Elite Visions, MTA Mentoring Program, Generation Citizen and Irondale. Through our partnership with our CBO, NYE we have been able to leverage their support in providing our students with a well rounded education that supports our students social, emotional, and mental health wellness. This partnership has connected and fostered a lasting relationship for our school community with Medgar Evers College. Via our collaboration, parents have access to a number of community organizations that support their needs in the form of health and wellness, housing supports, job readiness and financial literacy. Medgar Evers provides our 2018-19 CEP-RISE 14  students access to colleges in and out of state and exposes our students and parents to college and career readiness programs and activities. At Ebbets Field we have a diverse learning community that has 23.56% ENL and 28.16 SWD'. Our ENL students are from various cultural backgrounds (Arabic, Latino, Haitian Creole, and Africa)that speak a variety of languages and are often new to the country and are just learning English. Many of these students are not only beginners to the English languages often times have gaps in their education. As a result, while becoming acclimated to a new culture they often times are beginning readers and that lack basic literacy skills such as phonics and decoding that essential to reading grade level text. To support our ENL students we have adopted a push-in model for our ESL Program for ELA, Science and Social Studies instruction,bb to support them with language acquisition, and building vocabulary along with stand alone ENL classes to support them in phonic awareness, decoding, language acquisition, vocabulary, speaking and reading both literary and informational text. Our SWD's are often reading 2 or more grade levels behind their current grade and often need additional support in phonics awareness, decoding, vocabulary and comprehension of both literary and informational text. For our General Education and High Achieving students we have identified our students continue to struggle with vocabulary, developing critical thinking skills in being able to analyze how particular elements and ideas in a story, drama or informational text influence ideas, events and characters or plot over the course of the text. The Framework for Great Schools continues to guide our planning and development. The circle itself details the concentric relationships between Effective Leadership, Supportive Environment, Collaborative Teachers, Rigorous Instruction, Community and Family Engagement and Trust. This year, we have made significant strides in strengthening our practices in Rigorous Instruction, Effective Leadership, Collaborative Teachers. We have worked to ensure continuity and coherency across our curriculum, classrooms, and content instructional teams. A key lever of change in this work has been the implementation and our continued commitment to the Data Wise Improvement Process (DWIP) which is an inquiry-based approach used to to promote the strategic use of data, to meet the needs of all learners. Via the DWIP teacher teams and and administrators use specific protocols and procedures to analyze various stream of data, and to come to consensus about what the data reveals. All content teams, including our Instructional Leadership Team use the DWIP and protocols to actively review student work products, teacher lesson plans, and student data from I-Ready, ReadyNY, MOSL (Measures of Student Learning), instruction, and other assessments, to establish a learner center problem, problem of practice, and to create an action plan, to assess progress to improve student outcomes. This work as a school community has been transformational, and has allowed us to take ownership of our role as educators, in being a key levers in closing the achievement gap. As mentioned, our goal it to support our students where they are, and provide scaffolds, and to improve the outcomes for all inclusive of ELL’s and SWD’s. This belief aligns with our instructional focus: “If teachers use data to inform common-core aligned lessons and create multiple entry points to meet students learning needs through targeted small group instruction provided with actionable feedback that allows students access to all curricula, then students will develop and demonstrate the use of evidence to support arguments in both discussion, writing and conceptual understanding.” Learning across all classrooms and content areas will emphasize students are being immersed in rich discussions, and are engaged in learning tasks that are rigorous, CCLS aligned and challenge students to think critically. This content wide endeavor challenges students to think critically, ask higher order questions, and produce meaningful work products. During the 2018-2019 school year, we will strengthen our ability to support ENLs and SWD’s via continued PD around the use of ENL and Specially Designed Instruction for SWD’s. As this work continues in our classrooms and in our teachers instructional practice we will continue to support these endeavors through targeted and specific academic interventions during our Extended Learning Time to support our students’ learning needs. Next year, our Extended Learning Time (ELT) program at Ebbets Field Middle School, which is now embedded into our staggered schedule, will be at the end of the school day giving effective and highly effective teachers the opportunity to work with students in small targeted instructional groups to provide additional support in addressing skill gaps, developing stronger analytical skills in understanding complex text, problem solving opportunities and to develop students conceptual understanding in both Literacy and Math. This will create an environment where ALL students including our subgroups ENL, SWD, general education (GE) and, high achievers (HA) students can engage in rigorous tasks, receive support in skill areas where they need additional support and provide college and career readiness opportunities. By using a variety of online programs that are specifically designed to support ALL students where they 2018-19 CEP-RISE 15  are, address skill gaps and provide students opportunities to complete CCLS aligned tasks supported with on-going “data chats," students will be able to address their areas for further improvement. In 2018-19, we will continue to receive on-site support from the Brooklyn South Field Support Center Office (BFSC) in the form of weekly on site coaching and professional learning support for our teachers. Topics will include developing CCLS aligned units and lessons, explicit- instruction, and targeted small group instruction to meet the needs of all learners. The BFSC team will provide actionable feedback to teaching staff, in order to support and strengthen their practice. At Ebbets Field, we believe that the foundation of our school community is our parents. Our parents play and integral part in the work we do, and their voices, concerns and desires for their children; are at the forefront of every decision made. Many of our parents are working parents, who are from a variety of cultural backgrounds, abut they believe in the power of education in preparing their children for college and career readiness. It is for this reason that our school community must be a haven of trust and support for all families. To achieve this goal, we work collaboratively with our CBO partners and staff, to engage our parents, and to integrate them into the daily fabric of the school. To support these efforts, this year, we created a Parent Resource Center, where parents are able to meet freely with other parents, access and use technology, meet with teachers to discuss their child’s progress, and participate in workshops and family events. Due to our parents’ various work schedules, we provide workshops the morning and evening, to increase opportunities for our parents to attend school activities, To support our parents with addressing their needs, we connect them with various organizations within the community that provide the services and information they need. This year, with the support of our Parent Association, Lead CBO NYE, other CBO partners, and the staff at Ebbets Field, we hope to continue supporting our parents by letting our families know that our Community School is here to support them in whatever capacity we can. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 16  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 17K352 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 167 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 29 28 5 1 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 20 19 6 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 98.0% % Attendance Rate 94.0% % Reduced Lunch 22.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 25.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 4.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.17 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 24.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) No N/A 16 15 91.2% 4.2% 28.7% 61.1% 9.0% 0.0% 4 9% 9.5 27.0% 28% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups SWD, Black, Hispanic, ED Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A YES NO NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP-RISE 17  2018-19 CEP-RISE 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. (aligned to Rise Keys 2 and 6) Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. (aligned to Rise Key 3) The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. (aligned to Rise Keys 1 and 4) Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. (aligned to Rise Key 1) 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed na na na X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? The first strength we wish to identify is our curricula. Based on the our most recent Quality Review, which was held in May 2017, we received a Proficient in the planning of rigorous common core aligned curricula. The reviewer wrote "The school is currently implementing a rigorous and coherent curriculum that is aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards, by using the Expeditionary Learning, Teachers College Writing Program for ELA, Go Math Curriculum for Math, and the Scope and Sequence for Science along with the Glencoe curriculum, PBIS Science Curriculum, and SMART Science; Passport Curriculum for Social Studies." Another strength are our highly functioning teacher teams. Teacher leaders sit on the school wide Instructional Leadership Team and collectively influence change and rigor in our curricular programs, via the DWIP and protocols. This highly reflective inquiry-based process of learning how to use data wisely to make strategic instructional decisions, has led to increased pedagogical and curricular congruency across grades, departments, and the school. We will continue to strengthen this work and use it as a springboard for other areas of improvement. After reflecting on tenet 3, we have identified ourselves as proficient in all areas. However, there is still room for improvement in our understanding of the progression of the the standards across and on a grade; and how the "Power Standards" serve as the foundational underpinnings of students' understanding of the complex topics that they're learning. It is our intention to strengthen the way that we monitor students' progress via the use of the DWIP and the "Power Standards" next year. During our common planning meetings, teacher teams will continue to utilize the "Bridge to Practice" reflective assignment, to review student work and strategies implemented, to identify next steps for individuals, groups of students, or the whole class. Our focus on curricular modifications, adjustments, and 2018-19 CEP-RISE 19  enhancements will continue to promote customization and differentiation to meet all student needs. This past Spring, teams began to assess our students' performance in the "Power standards" weekly by entering data into our Power Standard Data Tracker. However, this practice was implemented inconsistently across classrooms. This year we will begin this process in September, and teachers will routinely discuss their students' work products and data, and use it to modify curricula and lesson plans during their content team meetings, and/or during dedicated Monday Professional Learning (PL) sessions. Additionally, based upon a review of various sources of instructional and formative data (i.e. iReady, Ready, MOSL, and student work products) during content team meetings, we identified that across grades and departments , teachers struggle with identifying the gaps in students' thinking and understanding during lessons. Therefore, the priority need we identified as most pressing is Statement of Practice (SOP) 3.5: "Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. (aligned to Rise Key 1)." We must strengthen this area by increasing teacher's ability to strategically use on the spot assessment techniques during lessons, and formative and summative assessments on the Power Standards, to create scaffolds, differentiated tasks ensure multiple entry points for all students through station activities. We will focus on teachers' use of data to drive instruction, and hold them accountable for delivering these adaptations and customizations for all learners. We will modify our pacing calendar, unit plans, and lesson plans to also ensure that they include suggested extensions for high achievers (HA). We will re-emphasize our expectation for making curricular modifications via our color coded ink system. To strengthen and support the work that teachers need to do with supporting students with taking ownership of our learning and creating classroom that reflect high academic expectations, we will employ the use of Restorative Circles (RC) in the classroom. Though RC we will create a safe and nurturing space where students can develop collaborative relationships, and see themselves as partners in their learning, so that they feel comfortable with sharing their areas of strength and areas for improvement. Teachers will employ the techniques from Brain Power Wellness which are designed to incorporate various modalities such as movement, mindfulness and focusing strategies to engage students multiple intelligences. Through these techniques teachers can create classrooms that help students: Focus better on their work   Gain Confidence in themselves  Build Harmonious relationships  Understand and manage their emotions   Improve their academic performance Look forward to coming to school Finally, students will be supported by teachers through the Success Highway Curriculum in our advisory classrooms where students can strengthen their resiliency skills by learning to value education, build academic confidence, learn how to manage stress and build their intrinsic motivation to address their obstacles and be successful learners. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Rigorous Instruction What is your school’s instructional focus? What is your vision for promoting the instructional focus consistently across classrooms? The Ebbets Field Middle School Instructional focus is “If teachers use data to inform common-core aligned lessons with multiple entry points to meet student’s learning needs, through targeted small group instruction and actionable feedback; then students will develop and demonstrate the use of evidence to support arguments in their discussions, writing and conceptual understanding.” To that end, via our belief in the use of small group/station classroom activities, we intend to promote the following teacher practices:  Analyzing and reflecting upon the implications posed by data (i.e., Planning, Supporting students, Scaffolds, Assessment, Feedback)  Unpacking the standards  Creating scaffolds for multiple points of entry  Providing targeted small group instruction 2018-19 CEP-RISE 20   Providing actionable feedback to students  Developing student’s ability to use evidence to support arguments in discussion, writing and to conceptually understand In order to promote our instructional focus consistently across classrooms, we will envision that our teacher teams will use the DWIP to regularly examine student data and work products. As a part of the DWIP, teachers will also conduct intervisitiations to each other's classrooms to examine the "look fors" of strong practice that were identified by the team. During administrative learning walks, our team will also refer to our list of instructional "look fors" and provide teachers with immediate, actionable feedback. Our administrative cabinet will examine a multitude of relevant data streams including: curricular pacing calendars, unit plans, extended learning opportunities, to build coherence in pedagogical practices, across grades and classrooms. Formative and summative Power Standard assessment data will be used to inform our practice and adjustments needed. We will continue to use the Data Wise protocols to identify a priority question, learner-centered problem and problem of practice for each content team. We will regularly provide teachers with feedback to ensure our instructional focus is evident in all unit plans, lesson planning, and school wide instructional initiatives. Our administrative cabinet will continue our system of weekly progress monitoring, but our major goal will be to deepen and improve the way we examine data at the Instructional Leadership team (ILT), classroom, and content team levels, to inform curricular and school-wide professional learning (PL) activities, department, and individual level decisions. To do this, we will hold ourselves to a strict cycle of data analysis, content planning, and progress monitoring activities, which will now be the responsibility of the ILT. The data sets we will regularly analyze are as follows: Data Tracking and Progress Monitoring: Data Set 1 (Daily) Pre and Post "Power Standard" Assessments Data Set 2 (Interim) Unit Assessments in ELA and Math Data Set 3 (Periodically) iReady Diagnostics (3 times a year) ReadyNY ELA and Math Assessments (2 times a year) All four cycles All four cycles All four cycles. In the area of the arts, we are building a rigorous Arts program. Our visual arts and music curriculum is rich and brings in a multitude of resources from TurnAround Arts at the Kennedy Center. We will continue to expand our Arts curriculum choices and build our academic program through the various teaching artist and organizations such as Ifetayo Cultural Center, Bric Museum, Irondale, Beats for Peace, Sports and Arts Foundation, Broadway Jr, Brooklyn Connections, and Generation Citizen. We envision that this level of enrichment will provide the impetus necessary to continue our Rise. All curricula will be scaffolded to support the diverse needs of our students, especially SWDs and ELLs. The scaffolds we employ are many. We are especially proud of our work with Translanguaging, a City University of New York (CUNY) research-driven approach to working with ELLs, within which students are given comprehensive inputs in their home language, enabling them to access curriculum in English. We also will continue to use graphic organizers and visuals, and three-dimensional models to support struggling students. Every one of our students will continue to have an IPad to access curriculum and engage with content. This technology will be used as a tool to access multiple representations, translations and interactive thought partners. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 21  Expanded learning time will be at the end of the day. This period will be used to leverage improved outcomes in literacy and problem solving, via the use of the iReady Reading program. We will also provide students with additional supports through AIS. The structure will be as follow: ELT/AIS Programs:  Imagine Learning Program (ELT) -All ELL’s- Via Imagine Learning Program, every child receives explicit, targeted instruction within an individualized learning path that continually adjusts to their needs through over 4,300 engaging activities that teach critical language and literacy concepts such as reading and listening comprehension, basic vocabulary, academic language, grammar, phonological awareness, phonics, and fluency. It’s differentiated, standards-aligned, and rigorous.  Great Leaps – (AIS) - ELL’s, SWD - Great Leaps uses proven instructional methods, each with powerful motivators to remedy a variety of reading problems. Great Leaps Reading is a researched and evidence-based fluency program that enables students to make significant strides in their reading. All Educational Assistants will use Great Leaps during ELA instructional periods.  Mathletics – Math- Level 1 & 2- ELT- Friday- Small Group Instruction and Conferencing Mathletics is a captivating online math learning space providing students with all the tools they need to be successful learners, both in the classroom and beyond. This online program is adaptive and provides CCLS aligned lessons (K-12) that provide students with a set of interactive activities that address their learning gaps. . Mathletics supports and caters to each teacher’s unique blend of student-driven learning and teacher-led instruction.  Mindplay – ELA - Level 1 & 2– (ELT)- – Thursdays- Small Group Instruction and Conferencing - Mindplay is an effective online reading program that provides tier 1 & 2 intervention and remediation. It improves students reading abilities by providing phonemic awareness, phonics, vocabulary, grammar for meaning, fluency and comprehension. It permits students with diverse skills and unique needs to read with control and precision.  Apex -Math/ELA -Level 3 & 4- (ELT)-Thursday(ELA)/Friday(Math)- Small Group Instruction and Conferencing-Apex is designed to support all students in achieving their potential through intervention and remediation while providing rigorous and accelerated learning. This interactive program meets students where they are while engaging them in grade level CCLS content.  MyOn - All Students- Classroom Stations-MyOn is an enhanced digital text library from respected publishers with a mix of fiction, non-fiction and optional reading supports. It also contains a suite of reading and writing tools that foster deep connections to the text, all on the same digital platform. - All Students – (ELT) -Tuesdays(ELA), Wednesdays(Math)-Small Group Instruction and conferencing. is a rigorous instruction and practice program that fully prepares students for the CCLS in a highly supportive way. It's an out-of-the box solution that teachers can use right away, because it provides them with step-by-step, point-of-use professional development to help them teach the standards most effectively.   AIS Tutors (ELT) – Ready Workbooks -Tutors will push into our 9th period ELT class to support students with ELA and Math instruction via small group instruction. They will focus primarily on student needs that surface during and Ready assessment results. Saturday Program - All Students - Coach Workbooks-NY Coach is an ideal all-inclusive program that adds depth, understanding, and practice for all of the Common Core Learning Standards and skills.   Afterschool Boot Camps – All Students - Coach Workbooks  AIS Teachers – Level 1 ELA –2-3x’s per week Supporting the Standard Books, Math-Supporting the Standards Workbooks-Supporting the Standards help progress students from lower to higher rigor with scaffolding and guided practice accelerating mastery by providing the latest review and practice students need for the New York State Tests. In addition to the above-mentioned programs, we will use the Success Highway curriculum for advisory. Each class will have three weekly sessions of advisory and each will focus on one of the lessons from the curriculum, based on the initial assessment data from the Success Highway online pre-assessment. Within these Success Highway lessons students’ will be challenged to make connections with social emotional curricula, themselves, their community and the world using restorative circles. We will also implement Brain Power Wellness activities ,teaching physical and mental brain breaks, mindfulness practices and social-emotional strategies that support a positive classroom learning 2018-19 CEP-RISE 22  environment. Brain Power will be implemented during advisory and Restorative circle activities. Using it in this context, will deepen our work with Restorative Practice, TAC-D and CRE Assessing student learning is paramount to student achievement. We will use assessment as follows:  Conduct pre-assessments on of one of the ELA power standards weekly and re-teach all to that standard based on the pre-assessment data. Then conduct a post-assessment to see if students improved. This data will be entered into the Power Standards Data tracker and analyzed bi-weekly to assesses student’s current needs.  Conduct pre/post assessments according to the major standards within the social studies and science curriculum. This data will be entered into the Power Standards Data tracker and analyzed bi-weekly to assesses students' current needs.  Unit Assessments will be conducted at the end of each unit. Teachers and the administration will analyze the data to strategically make modifications to curricular and unit plans.  After common assessments are administered, teachers will analyze their data to identify student’s strength and weakness, and make the appropriate adjustments to their plans.  Conduct assessment Ready NY ELA 3 times for the school year. After each assessment, teachers and Admin will analyze the data to identify student’s strength and weakness. These data streams will also be recorded in SKEDULA. During common planning period and DWIP sessions, teachers will identify trends by class, by grade, by subgroup to inform future instruction and curricular adjustments. How will you implement a standards-aligned curricula that meets the needs of your diverse learners, including ELLs and SWDs? We will implement a standards- aligned curricula that meets the need of our diverse learners, including ELL’s and SWD's through the use of our core ELA, Math, Science, and Social Studies curricula. These curricula will be supported by Imagine Learning (a program that supports 15 languages and builds core reading and academic language skills. It also builds students conceptual understanding , problem solving skills supported by 1:1 live on demand instruction) specifically for ELL students. To support our Level 1 & 2 students with literacy, we will use Mindplay, an online reading program that provides tier 1 & 2 intervention and remediation. It improves students' reading abilities by providing phonemic awareness, phonics, vocabulary, grammar for meaning, fluency and comprehension. It permits students with diverse skills and unique needs to read with control and precision. We will use Great Leaps an online program that supports and motivates students to improve their reading comprehension through DOK questions relating to literature will support our SWD's who are oftentimes struggling readers. To support our level 1 & 2 students in Math we will use Mathletics, an adaptive online program that provides CCLS pre-requisite and grade level aligned lessons with interactive actives that address students learning gaps. Finally, for our Level 3 & 4 students in both Math & ELA Apex Learning is designed to support all students in achieving their potential, through intervention and remediation while providing rigorous and accelerated learning. This interactive program meets students where they are, while engaging them in grade level CCLS content. These programs will assess students' skills, identify the gaps and meet students where they are in order to bridge their skills gaps by supporting them in the pre-requisite skills they need in order to complete grade level tasks. Each one of these programs are designed to target, support and strength student skills in ELA and/or Math. The vision for implementation of the CCLS curricula programs is to bridge the gaps in student understanding, perception by providing them cognitively engaging and rigorous tasks intended to empower and provide each learner access to the curriculum, in order to increase their academic achievement. and proficiency in ELA and Math. What is your vision for ensuring that all student have access to rigorous coursework that moves them towards career and college readiness? How will you support the personal and academic skills, habits, and behaviors needed for students to be career and college ready? Our vision is to provide our students with rich academic experiences and scaffolds to empower them to fully to access the curriculum while building research, writing and analysis skills and habits that will increase their college and career readiness. The instructional shifts are embedded to provide students with a balance in informational and literacy texts, 2018-19 CEP-RISE 23  increased levels of complexity, rich academic vocabulary and writing from multiple sources. In mathematics these shifts are realized by providing focus, coherence, fluency and deep understanding of mathematical concepts and application. Finally, we will continue our work with Specifically Designed Instruction to ensure that every student is met at her/his entry point and has multiple means of accessing the curriculum. How do you envision embedding the elements of culturally responsive instruction and how will you know that implementation is successful? At Ebbets Field, we envision incorporating Restorative Practice circles as well as Brain Power wellness into our instruction to ensure that every child’s social and emotional needs are addressed during instruction. During our advisory period students will engage in the Success Highway curriculum. Students will be given a pre-assessment that will identify students social and emotional needs. These needs will then be addressed through the Success Highway lessons. Periodically, students will take mid and post assessment to further measure the social and emotional development and growth. In addition, we will use the DWIP as the key lever for informing professional learning, delivery of instruction and planning differentiated lessons that support small targeted learning groups. We expect teachers to provide students with actionable feedback that allows all students to gain access to all curricula and content. Teachers will confer with students one-to-one or in groups based upon the students' needs. This will ensure that students are aware of, and own their areas of strength and areas in which they need to improve, which promote college and career readiness. Teachers will provide multiple opportunities for students to practice and apply learning and to access multiple texts and materials to fully connect and engage in their course of study. Finally, teachers will take advantage of I-Ready, Ready, and Unit Assessment data, to prescribe individual assignments targeting each student's area of growth and/or to build upon their strengths. What is your vision for the use of a comprehensive assessment strategy (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, and summative) to drive curricular, instructional, and organizational decisions that impact student outcomes? As mentioned, EFMS is a Data Wise school. To support our DW practices, we will continue to update our school-wide assessment calendar, which is shared with all stakeholders via Google Docs, to inform them of the all assessments dates, final dates for analysis, and the dates of administrative and ILT PM. All teachers will engage in conducting data analyses of the major assessments administered, through the DW process. Teachers will regularly analyze data and student work products to identify trends and patterns for each assessment administered (i.e. iReady, Ready, and Unit Assessments). This data will then be used to make modifications to pacing calendars, Unit and lesson plans, to address students needs; and to create scaffolds/extensions for all learners (i.e. HAs, GE, SWDs and ELL students). This data will be tracked and monitored through our New Visions Data Sorter (NVDS) and/or our Power Standards Trackers. Findings from our data analyses will also be used to inform adjustments to curricula, lesson plans, and PL activities. How do you envision differentiating teacher professional learning opportunities to support instructional foci, meet students’ unique needs and advance culturally responsive education in your school? During our Monday PL teachers will receive individualized professional development based on Advance trends, their ability to plan for and implement small group lessons/station activities, and their ability to use classroom level data to plan for instruction. PL will be targeted to meet the needs of individual, small groups, and all teachers. We will also leverage our BFSC to support us with small group PL activities for our ELA, Math, SWD and ENL teachers; and to support with CRE PL throughout the school year, to support best instructional practices, foster a culture of high expectations, and to foster strong relationships with students. Part 3 – Annual Goal 2018-19 CEP-RISE 24  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. *By June 2019, as a result of rigorous instruction and the DWIP, student performance at levels 2 and 3 will increase by a minimum of 15% respectively, and the number of students performing at level 4 will increase a minimum of 5%, as measured by the NYS ELA exam. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve ELA Proficiency Rating Performance index on State Exam ELA Performance index on State Exam Mathematics. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 25  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. ELA Teachers will engage in the Consultancy Protocol during teacher teams to surface the gaps between direct instruction (what was taught) and students learning (what students know, or were able to do), and to strategize ways to improve their planning, instructional practices, and/or use of on the spot data to address the needs of all students. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All ELA teachers Increased proficiency rating ELA Weekly from October 2018-June 2019 Principal, AP ESL, ICT and General Ed. Teachers. How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) We project that a minimum of 50% of students tested will demonstrate proficiency on the "Snapshot" assessment of the Standards that have been assessed 2018-19 CEP-RISE 26  All Teachers Increased proficiency rating ELA Once a month from September 2018-June 2019 Principal, AP ESL, ICT and General Ed. Teachers. Teachers will engage in PL with the FSC ENL Coach on implementing Advance Literacy Strategies to improve their understanding of ENL/SWD on the spot data, and strengthen and support ENL's/SWD students' comprehension, analytical skills and understanding of content vocabulary during daily content instruction. Teachers will be expected to continue with administering pre-requisite snapshot mini and post snapshot unit assessments, using our ELA Teachers Increased proficiency in ELA Weekly from 9/2018-6/2019 Principal, AP, DSR, FSC Coaches, Content Lead in ELA We project that a minimum of 50% of ENL/SWD students tested will demonstrate proficiency on the "Snapshot" assessment of the Standards that have been assessed. Teacher lesson plans reflective of Advanced literacy Strategies. We project that a minimum of 50% of students tested will 2018-19 CEP-RISE 27  online Google Tracker, to monitor student performance, in ELA CCLS Standards, with a focus on the Power Standards to inform teachers instructional next steps to improve student achievement. To encourage student ownership and accountability of their learning, teachers will be required to maintain student portfolios. As part of the process, during the unit of study, teachers will conduct individual data chats (student conferences) where students will be required to write a reflection on their learning throughout the unit of study, set goals for improvement considering their current data and teacher feedback and to update their portfolio with their strongest piece of work. Teachers will be expected to continue with using the Google Increased Proficiency in ELA All Content Teachers Weekly from 9/2018-6/2019 Principal, AP, Content Leads in ELA, Math, Sci, SS, Arts, FSC Coach, DSR demonstrate proficiency on each "Snapshot" assessment of the Standards that have been assessed Student Portfolios & Conferencing Logs in Math & ELA . 2018-19 CEP-RISE 28  Principal, AP, Content Lead in Math, FSC Coach, DSR Tracker, to monitor student performance, based upon the Power Standards, in order to inform their next steps. They will also be introduced to new templates that have been created, that will require students to reflect upon their pre and post assessments performance and personal next steps. The pre mini-assessments will be used to identify the pre-requisite skills that students have, before beginning a unit of study, and the post mini-assessments will track gains in students understanding at the end of the unit of study. ELA Teachers Increased Proficiency in ELA 9/2018 - 6/2018 Student snapshot data Reflection analysis tool in both ELA and Math. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 29  4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will conduct monthly parent workshops that will allow parents to assist their child(ren) with their homework assignments. Workshops will focus on unpacking the common core standards for parents and providing them with the tools to help their children at home. Parents will have access to Pupil Path were so that they can monitor their child(ren’s) progress throughout the school year. Parents will also be encouraged to attend all school instructional workshops which will be conducted by teachers with the support of the principal, assistant principal and Parent Coordinator. Academic expectations will be re-enforced during our monthly parent engagement "Chat and Chew" meetings with the principal, or during workshops, giving parents an opportunity to share their concerns and discuss ideas for supporting student achievement. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 30  Human Resources: School Budget and Lead CBO's Community School Budget, Turnaroud Arts, BFSC and Achievement Network Instructional Resources: Expeditionary Learning and Teachers College Writing Curriculum, Passport, Go Math, I-Ready online License, Imagine Learning Licenses for ENL students, ReadyNY, MYon, PBis Sciecne Curriculum, Mathletics online Licenses, Language Power Curriculum for ENL students Apex Learning online licenses and Mindplay online licenses Instructional Leads facilitating and leading Content Department in best practices , Student Conferencing - Data Chats, Data Wise Inquiry, inter-visitiations IPad, Chromebooks, SmartBoards and independent work; common planning. Per Diem funding for substitute during in-school professional learning and classroom inter-vistations Missed prep funding to pay teachers for professional learning to support content planning and curriculum development Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, as result of rigorous instruction student performance will increase by a minimum of 7.5% of students improving from level 1 to 2 and level 2 to 3; and a minimum of 2.5 % increase in students improving from level 3 to 4, as measured by the most current Ready NYS ELA Assessment Data. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure will be the most current Ready NY ELA Assessment data Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. (aligned to Rise Key 4) 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. (aligned to Rise Key 4) 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. (aligned to Rise Key 5) 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. (aligned to Rise Key 5) na na na X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 5. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? At EFMS, we are a community that CARES, where every stakeholder: strives to clearly Communicate our academic and behavioral expectations   encourage students to take pride in their Achievement and success  exemplifies a Respectful attitude towards each other, diversity, and learning  works collaborate to Engage the whole child, whether it be academically, socially/emotionally, or mentally During the spring, we collectively examined and reflected on various sources of data including our learning environment and in-house staff and student surveys, to identify our strengths, weaknesses and next steps. As a result, one of the strongest areas of our practice has been with the implementation of restorative practices in our school community. The majority of our staff members use an array of techniques to aid in creating a safe and nurturing environment to support our students. Staff use techniques that have de-escalated conflicts. Via restorative circles and monthly town hall activities, students have a forum to express their feelings and concerns in a safe space. Our students and teachers have truly been receptive to this work, and we will continue to implement Restorative Practices not only in our advisory program but also, during our instructional periods. In addition, members of our Technical Assistive Center for Disproportionally (TAC-D) Team, which consists of administrators, our Restorative Coordinator, and teachers meet weekly to review data, such as student responses to our Restorative Survey and OORS data, to identify the needs and perceptions of our students, teachers and families. This close analysis has allowed us to be reflective of the needs of our 2018-19 CEP-RISE 32  community, and how we can best support them. Our students are active participants in our advisory program, where they have an opportunity to engage in restorative circles to discuss an array of topics that matter to them. The advisory program, which is facilitated by an adult advisor, provides a safe and nurturing environment for every child to share. In response to student crises, we have utilized more restorative practices, mediation and parent conferences. These practices has resulted in better responses to conflicts, and lower suspension rates. Another initiative that supports students with developing positive academic behaviors, is the Positive Behavior Intervention System (PBIS) Universal Matrix, which emphasizes our expectations relative to our CARE behavioral system. Using the PBIS CARES Matrix, staff members reward students with a “Jackie Buck” for displaying positive behaviors in and outside of the classroom. Each week teachers submit the “Jackie Buck” students have earned s to our PBIS Team, who use an online an account system to track earned bucks. Students can see their accrued balance and spend their at our PBIS student store daily during lunch. This practice has reinforced positive behaviors and high expectations throughout the school community. Lastly, our students receive additional support through our NYE Behavioral Specialists who works collaboratively with administration, parents, the Guidance Counselor and Restorative Coordinator, to support and address students’ social and emotional needs, including the de-escalation of incidents in a positive and supportive manner. Despite all that we do to meet the social/emotional needs of our students, one of our biggest challenges is meeting the needs of ALL students because, if one of our students fail, we all fail. Additionally, a review of student work products and our most recent New York State ELA and Math scores, our EOY iReady and ReadyNY data revealed that our greatest challenge is our inability to meet the varying academic needs of our ELLs and SWDs. Therefore, our administrative cabinet and and student support staff will work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data, to respond to students' social and emotional developmental heath needs. This is the area of our practice that we must improve upon,, so we selected Tenet 5.5 as our priority need for the supportive environment. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Supportive Environment What is your vision for a supportive school environment? How will you, in partnership with each CBO and families, enact your vision? The Ebbets Field Middle School Community envisions a school where ALL students feel safe, supported, nurtured and are challenged by high expectations set by their teachers, parents and peers. A school where students are challenged academically to think critically through rich evidence based discussions and writing products, are engaged in exploratory and inquiry based learning activities, where students learning needs are addressed through small targeted group instruction and where students have a voice and are active participants in their learning through conferencing with their teachers. It is a school community that not only addresses the academic learning of each child but supports the social emotional development of each child through our restorative practices in and outside of the classroom, weekly advisory, monthly Community Meetings to promote a sense of community, provide student voice and to motivate and push student academic success. We envision establishing a Student Government where students meet with their peers and the school administration to make decisions collectively for their school community and where students of concern who struggle both academically and social/emotionally are supported by our Student Support Success Team (SSST) to provide on-going support to students and families. It is a learning community where every staff member from the principal to our school support staff serve as a mentor and advisors foster meaningful and supportive relationships with 2018-19 CEP-RISE 33  our students in order to provide support and encouragement to the whole child and their families as they progress through Middle School. We envision a school where social emotional growth is taught explicitly and implicitly through a coordination of services and frameworks that reflect culturally responsive education, implementation of Positive Behavior and Intervention Services (PBIS) and Commitment, Achievement, Respect, Engagement and Service (CARES) practices/approaches, Restorative Circles through weekly Advisory. Presently the school has adopted a weekly advisory program which will meet weekly across all grades. During Advisory activities, ALL advisors will:  Support students academically by using the advisory program Success Highways, along with social and emotional support Serve a a point person of support for students in any area students may need support   Utilize and implement Restorative circles to actively engage students in a variety of activities and topics that are grade appropriate  Promote a positive school culture a that encourages the development of inter-personal and inter-group respect among students, and between staff and students, by highlighting students of the month, awards for perfect attendance, and for students with the most improved attendance/academic achievement  provide a venue for school leadership, school support staff, teachers, parent coordinator, CBO's to communicate important school wide behavioral and academic expectations, and events  provide students a safe and supportive environment, where they can express their concerns and have a voice in their academic, social and emotional development  promote the school wide PBIS initiative to improve student behaviors through rewards, incentives, and acknowledging positive personal and academic behaviors EFMS will utilize a culturally responsive approach to educating our students and supporting our families. With the support of our CBO, NYE we have will provide the following services to our students and families:  On site counseling services to support the emotional needs of our students and families  Enrichment opportunities, such as robotics, coding, graphic design, cooking, fashion and jewelry making, mentoring, public speaking, girls and boys support groups, sports etc., during our afterschool program  Academic tutoring during our Extended Learning Time   Success mentors for our high risk students with social emotional, attendance needs, etc. School wide events that celebrate our students achievement and school wide community service learning projects  Behavioral Specialists that engages in restorative circles, mediation, parent support and conferencing around behavioral concerns  Parent workshops reflective of parent needs  Access to community based organizations that can address concerns such as housing, health, mental health services, employment support, immigration etc.  GED and ESL services, sponsored by Medgar Evers College  Assessment of our families' needs, to provide adequate supports and services within the school building  College Access Programs, to promote college and career readiness to workshops that prepare students for high school, exploration of careers and college visits both locally and outside of New York City At EFMS, we envision our school working collaboratively with the entire community, to accelerate the social, emotional and academic growth for ALL students. We envision EFMS as a school where staff and families work collaboratively, to support students with developing a positive mindset, that promotes college and career readiness, academic, and social-emotional success. Describe your plan to implement a culture of trust and high expectations for teachers, students, families and community partners. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 34  To create a culture of trust and high expectations for teachers, students, families and community partners we will continue to provide opportunities where this can happen through: SLT Meetings   CST Meetings  Monthly Chat and Chew meeting with parents and the principal  Weekly Open Office Hours with the Principal  Town hall meetings with both students and parents inviting guest speakers, Community leaders and organizations to be participants  Book clubs with parents and staff around culturally responsive education  All staff PD's addressing culturally responsive education and high expectations and restorative practices  Creating a parent resource center making community partnerships accessible and available to parents within the school community Who are your CBO partners? How will each CBO sustain and support the social-emotional and academic growth of your students? CBO Partner Sports and Arts Foundation in Schools Partnership with Children Interboro Medical Center New York City University Dental School Center for Supportive Schools NYE Medgar Evers College Turn Around Arts CBO Focus Lead Partner and Coordinator of Services; SONYC Club Mental Health Partner Restorative Practices Technical Assistance on Disproportionality (TAC-D) School Response Team (Mental Health and Wellness) Dental Peer Group Connection Parent Education and Empowerment Affiliate School Arts Education and School Improvement How will you, in partnership with your CBO, create a supportive and engaging environment for your students’ families? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 35  To improve our ability to meet the academic needs of ALL learners, including our ELLs and SWDs, we will inundate teachers with professional development around being more culturally responsive in our educational practices, effectively analyzing student data (such as formative assessment data, advisory pre & post assessments OORS incidents and suspensions reported, attendance, restorative surveys, student perception surveys, learning environment surveys, and PPO/Quality Review feedback) and creating actionable next steps that acknowledges differences in students' cultures and learning styles will provide teachers with appropriate supports in addressing our students social /emotional development and mental health well-being. We will also provide students with feedback that encourages them to take the lead role in improving their performance. Additionally, our lead CBO, NYE, will work collaboratively with School Leaders, students, families and all stakeholders to actively plan and implement programs and initiatives that support our vision and mission to ensure that ALL students are empowered to become lifelong learners who value learning as a productive struggle, and instill in themselves that self-determination, perseverance, and resilience are key factors of success. Each CBO will aid in providing students and their families with targeted supports that address their academic, social, emotional, health, and mental well-being. Counseling supports will also serve to strengthen the relationship between families and the school community, so that we work as collaborative partners in their children’s success. This plan will also ensure that our students have the skills and dispositions necessary for college and career readiness. What essential questions, or key themes, will be explored by all staff and students that acknowledge and celebrate the culture and heritage of the student body? The Key themes that will be acknowledged and celebrated by staff and students:  A night to celebrate our cultures and diversity within our school community  Guest lecturers of various cultural backgrounds  A Night of Success celebrating student academic achievement  Poetry Slam  Broadway Performance  Talent Shows  Multi-cultural celebrations - Harvest Feast   Cultural Bazaar International Breakfast What evidence will you use to gauge the impact of your plan to create a positive school environment? To gauge the impact of our plan to create a positive school environment will utilize: Student perception survey Success Highway Pre and Post Assessment    Restorative Student and Teacher Survey  Parent and Student Surveys Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Supportive Environment. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – 2018-19 CEP-RISE 36  Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By June 2019, based upon a review of various sources of student data through the coordination of social, emotional, academic, and health services that strategically target student and family needs, we will increase school-wide attendance by a minimum of .8 percentage point, as measured by the end of year student attendance data in Automate the System (ATS). Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Improved Attendance Increase performance index on state exam ELA and Math Increased proficiency rating ELA and Math 2018-19 CEP-RISE 37  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) As a part of our Restorative Practices and TAC-D, initiatives members of the committee will regularly examine the "Success Highway" Pre and Post assessment of students' social and emotional development, to devise action plans to support students' social and emotional development. With the creation of the Student Success Support All students grades 6 -8 Improved attendance, and ELA and Math performance/proficiency 10/2018 to 6/2019 Administrative Team Community School Director (CSD), Restorative Practices Coordinator, TAC-D teacher team members, Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist and Interboro Mental Health Counselor Administrative Team Community School How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) "Success Highway" Student work products 2018-19 CEP-RISE 38  ALL students grades 6 - 8, Improved attendance 10/2018 - 6/2018 Director (CSD), Restorative Practices Coordinator, TAC-D teacher team members, Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist and Interboro Mental Health Counselor Review of the Pre and post Success Highway Assessment, SSST minutes and agendas, SSST Kid Talk Protocols and OORS Reports Team (SSST )we will combine our Restorative Practices and our D17 TAC-D Initiatives, to engage all school stakeholders in creating a common vision for Culturally Responsive Education and a Restorative school climate and culture. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 39  2018-19 CEP-RISE 40  2018-19 CEP-RISE 41  We will strengthen parent involvement by providing monthly themed workshops with the support of our CBO, New York Edge and Parent Coordinator, to empower and engage parents in being active participants in supporting their children's education. The workshops will cover the following topics:  immigration & Legal support  Common Core Standards and Curriculum Job Readiness/ Vocational Counseling  ESL services  GED/Continuing  Education programs  Parenting in the   21st Century Learning Styles Support with instructional curriculum  Child development  Mental Health awareness and access to services  Housing support  Medical/Health Services All families Improved attendance 9/2018 to 6/2019 Administrative Team and CSD, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, Restorative Practices Coordinator, PA parent leaders, and Parent Workshop Agendas and sign-in logs and Parent Exit Surveys. Teachers 2018-19 CEP-RISE 42  2018-19 CEP-RISE 43  All students and teachers All Student grades 6 - 8 PBIS Behavioral Matrix - CARES will continue to reinforce behavioral expectations within the school community. Student Community Meetings and PL for teachers will serve as the avenue to support the implementation of the school behavioral expectations The Attendance Team will use the New Visions Data Portal and multi-tiered Attendance Plan to target, support, and monitor the attendance of chronic and at risk students daily, weekly and monthly. Improved attendance Increase performance index on state exam ELA and Math 9/2018 to 6/2019 Administration, CSD, AP, Guidance, Parent Coordinator, PBIS Team , Behavior Specialists and Teachers Improved attendance 9/2018-6/2019 CSD, Principal, Success Mentor, School Aides, Family Worker, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, Attendance Teacher PBIS Behavioral Tracking System, OORS Reports and Student Government suggestion Box. Review of Daily ATS attendance records in the New Visions Attendance Heat Map and Daily attendance 2018-19 CEP-RISE 44  logs for chronic and at risk students 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will engage parents and families to support their understanding of Supportive Environment by:  Parent Orientations - August - September 2018 - CBO - NYE, Teachers, Principal, AP, Restorative Coordinator  Parent Teacher Conferences - September 2018 - CBO - NYE, Teachers, Principal, AP, Guidance, Social Worker, Restorative Coordinator, PC  Monthly Chat and Chews with Principal - PC, CBO - NYE  PA Meetings - PA Board, Principal  Monthly Parent Workshops - Teachers, PC, CBO - NYE, PA Leaders Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. Human Resources: Administration, teachers, para-professionals, Community School Director, Restorative Coordinator, Social Worker, Success Mentors Tutors, Guidance Counselor, and Parent Coordinator Turnaround Arts, Partnership for Children – Restorative Circles/Practices, Brain Power Wellness - CRE and supports instructional practices, Success Highways - Advisory Programming that affords Restorative Practices to be implemented during instructional periods and in advisory Peer Group Connection Curriculum, Success Highways Advisory Program, Restorative Circles Curriculum, Brain Power Wellness Curriculum Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA P/F Set-aside 21st Century C4E 2018-19 CEP-RISE 45  Title I 1003(a) X Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School X Achievement Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019 there will be a minimum increase in school-wide attendance rate by a minimum of 0.5 percent of a point, as measured by our attendance in ATS. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use the following instrument:  ATS  New Vision Attendance Heat map  ORRS Report Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 46  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. (aligned to Rise Key 2) 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. (aligned to Rise Key 1) 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. (aligned to Rise Key 4) 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). (aligned to Rise Key 3) na na na X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? At EFMS, we have reflected on our strengths and looked at several data streams, including teacher team artifacts and agendas. In doing so, we identified ourselves as proficient in Practices 4.2, 4.3, 4.4 and 4.5. According to our most recent DOE Learning environment School Survey, our teachers have a high level of trust between them, and are open and willing to work together to discuss areas in need of improvement, and ways to reach all student learners. Another strength we have identified, is our teacher leaders. We have lead teachers in ELA, Math, Social Studies and Science. These teacher leaders are an integral part of our ILT, and in their roles as ILT members, they are responsible for turn keying any pertinent information discussed by the team, back to their respective content area teams. They are also tapped to attend outside professional development, turnkey what was learned, and to lead professional development activities in their content areas. The teacher leaders also serve as key points of contact for facilitators who have been tapped to lead team meetings. All teacher teams use Data Wise protocols and are expected to update their pacing calendar and unit plans monthly. Based on a review of Ready, iReady, Instructional, and student artifacts, teacher surveys, and Advance Data, analyzed during administrative progress monitoring and teacher team meetings, we have identified SOP 4.5 as the priority need for collaborative teachers. Most of our teams identified that their greatest problem of practice, is their ability to strategically use data to inform HOW they will use data to inform their instructional planning; and to meet the needs of all learners in the classroom. Teachers also acknowledged the need to acquire more strategies to adequately support the needs of the many learners under their charge. This means that there is a need for teachers to receive additional professional development on the use of specially designed instruction and in the use of appropriate ESL methodologies. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 47  With that said SOP, 4.5 is the priority need and will be the key lever used it to inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Collaborative Teachers What is your vision for collaborative teaching? EFMS envisions a school where teachers have multiple opportunities to engage in meaningful collaboration. A school that provides multiple periods within the school's instructional day, dedicated to collaborative work. A school where teachers use research-based data inquiry approaches, such as DATA WISE, to access and analyze multiple data streams and inform teaching and learning. A school community that uses well-developed structures to adapt the school wide curriculum, ensure student engagement, and increased depth of knowledge. A school where our instructional focus “If teachers use data to inform common-core aligned lessons and create multiple entry points to meet student’s learning needs through targeted small group instruction provided with actionable feedback that allows students to gain access to all curricula, then students will develop and demonstrate the use of evidence to support arguments in both discussions, writing and conceptual understanding," to customize and provided targeted learning experiences for ALL students. A school where ELT/AIS periods are used to deepen students’ learning and engage them in critical thinking about the “big ideas and themes embedded in their units of study, and a school that implements restorative practices to ensure that every student's academic, social-emotional, and mental health needs are addressed.” A school within which questioning and discussion is rich and evident in every classroom and lesson, and where where teachers work collaboratively to understand their curricula, in order to create increased opportunities for metacognition, connections, multiples means of accessing curriculum, and activating students’ prior knowledge, to ensure that ALL students learn more deeply. This is our vision for collaborative teachers. At EFMS we envision all teachers using the following practices in every classroom, to meet the needs of ALL students:  Where teachers collaborate using protocols and procedures from Data Wise on lessons, units and curriculum to ensure that all learners’ needs are met.  Where each teacher creates a classroom marked by respect and rapport, through a mutually developed set of behavioral expectations that is collaboratively established using Positive Behavior, Intervention and Supports (PBIS). This uniform system of rituals and routines will be present in every classroom and sets a consistent behavioral expectation that aligned to city and school wide policies and is reflective of students' needs and abilities.  Where community educators and partners support a collaborative teaching environment. Partnerships that provide academic supports in Mathematics and ELA ; Partners like Medgar Evers, Interboro Psychiatric Counseling Services, Partnership with Children, and Brain Power Wellness, provide our students and parents with resources and supports to address social, emotional, mental and family concerns to better improve student learning outcomes  Where the Arts are infused into our school community with our partnership with Turn Around Arts where student are ensured multiple points of entry and the school honestly and deliberately provides every student with a liberal arts education.  A school where teachers are able to foster and develop mentor relationships with students through advisory and monthly town hall meetings where students are able to have a voice and are celebrated for their accomplishments both academically and behaviorally  Where parents are continually informed about their children's progress relative to the Common Core Learning Standards, Instructional Shifts through Skedula/Pupil Path and social emotional learning  Where data is used for professional learning, modifying the pacing calendar, unit plans and instruction that supports small targeted group instruction that provide students with actionable feedback and allows all students to gain access to content curricula 2018-19 CEP-RISE 48  Where the school leader and the SLT collaborate and build a strong partnership along with the CBO, New York Edge to support the needs of all stakeholders within the school community. How do you envision enhancing collaboration amongst your Instructional Leadership Team to improve teacher practices and student learning? At EFMS, our ILT will incorporate the following practices to improve teacher collaboration, practice and student learning:  All Teacher teams, including the ILT will implement the Data Wise protocols and cycles of inquiry within their meetings.  The ILT (and all Content Teams will meet weekly for 90 minutes) to give teachers the opportunity to work collaboratively in reviewing and analyzing data and student work products, revising and adjusting curriculum , identifying effective instructional strategies, monitoring and track student learning, and reflect on best instructional practices  The ILT will utilize Data wise Protocols of data inquiry to identify trends in various data streams, create next steps and find solutions to increase learning outcomes for all students, and finally plan for professional learning. Our ILT will also use protocols, and shared facilitation to promote equity of voice and shared decision making These practices will enhance collaboration, cohesion and congruency across grades and content departments, thus positively impacting teacher practice and learning outcomes for all of our adult learners. How do you envision collaboration within teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? Using Data Wise inquiry protocols, the Consultancy Protocol, and our newly created Planning For Success Protocol, teacher teams will collaboratively identify trends in students’ strengths and weaknesses, and find solutions to address those weaknesses, build on students' strengths, and increase outcomes for all students. Teachers will collaboratively identify and help with the planning of the professional learning that needs to occur, based upon the learner centered problem, problem of practice, the instructional focus, observational recommendations, and our shared understanding of teacher needs. Collectively, we will implement strategies and interventions, observe and make adjustments based on data, and stay relentlessly focused on using data to inform classroom, department, grade and school-based decisions. How do you envision collaboration across teacher teams to improve data driven teacher practices that result in improvement in student achievement? What data will teachers and the Instructional Leadership Team regularly review to ensure that they are reflecting upon needed adjustments to teaching practices and meeting individual student learning needs? Data Reviewed Student Work Products and Tasks Student Interim Assessments Teachers will examine student work products and exit slips, , based upon the standards, curricular, and lesson plans, Teachers will examine unit, formative, and interim assessments to assess student progress 2018-19 CEP-RISE 49 Lesson Plan Analysis Teachers will assess pacing calendars, unit, and lesson plans for standards alignment, differentiation and scaffolds Describe the screening process you use to identify students who need extra help? How do you use this process to determine which intervention to provide? Every week during the content team meeting teachers share out during our Bridge to practice activity, which requires the team to examine student work products to identify their initial strength and weakness, and the impact of the teaching strategies implemented on their outcomes. Teachers will then discuss with their co-teachers scaffolds that will support students' needs. These scaffolds will be implemented during small group instructions. As interim assessment data becomes available it will be examined and analyzed by Admin, ILT and the respective teacher team, to identify trends and patterns. Based on the data, pacing calendars, unit plans and lesson plans will be modified to include scaffolds and extensions to address students' needs. Teachers' lesson plans will be analyzed during all learning walks, along with the trends from formal and informal observations to identify teachers' needs, trends and patterns. All teachers will be provided with actionable feedback and this data will inform individualize, group and whole school professional learning. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. *By June 2019, as a result of rigorous instruction and the DWIP, student performance at levels 2 and 3 will increase by a minimum of 15% respectively, and the number of students performing at level 4 will increase a minimum of 5%, as measured by the NYS Math exam. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Increase students learning by 40% by students demonstrating 1 year or more growth in Math Increased proficiency rating Math Increased Attendance 2018-19 CEP-RISE 50  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Teachers will be expected to continue with using our online Google Tracker, to monitor student performance, based upon the Power Standards, in order to inform their next steps for instructional planning. They will also be introduced to new templates that have been created, that will require students to reflect upon their pre and post assessment performance and personal next steps. The pre mini-assessment snapshots will be used to identify the pre-requisite skills that students have, before beginning a unit of study, and the post mini-assessment will track gains in students understanding at the end of the unit of study. To encourage student ownership of their learning, teachers will be required to maintain student portfolios and encourage students to access PupilPath on a weekly and monthly basis to track their Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Math Teachers Increased performance index on state Math exam Sept., 2018 Jun., 2019 Principal, APs, Math and ELA Content Lead Teachers, ESL Teacher Instructional Leadership Team, Teachers How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) We project that a minimum of 50% of students tested will demonstrate proficiency on each Math "Snapshot" assessment of the Standards that have been assessed All Teachers Increased performance index on state Math exam 9/2018 - 6/2019 Principal, AP, Lead Teachers, Instructional Cabinet, CSD, DSR Review of student portfolios and conferencing logs. Pre and Post Unit Assessments. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 51  academic progress. As a part of the process, during the unit of study, they will conduct individual data chats (conferences) with students to discuss their strengths, weaknesses, and next steps. Culminating each unit of study, students will be required to write a reflection on their learning throughout the unit of study, and to update their portfolio with their strongest piece of work. As a part of their differentiated professional learning, the Math teacher team will use the newly created “Planning for Success” protocol to address a standard that students struggle with. During the PL activity, teachers will solve a NYS simulated test problem, identify the pre-requisite content and skills students must be secure with; identify the current content and skills the task demands; the pedagogical moves that the teacher would need to make, to promote conceptual understanding; and the possible misconceptions that students might have. The session will culminate with the teachers planning a lesson for the standard. Review of Teacher lesson plan created using the Planning for Success Protocol and student work products. All Math Teachers Increased performance index on state Math exam Sept., 2018 Principal, APs, and Instructional Content Lead Teacher, DSR, CSD Jun., 2019 2018-19 CEP-RISE 52  All Math Teachers Increased performance index on state Math exam Sept., 2018 Principal, APs, and Instructional Content Lead Teachers, DSR, CSD Jun., 2019 All Teachers Increased performance index on state Math exam Sept., 2018 Principal, APs, and Instructional Content Lead Teachers, DSR, CSD Jun., 2019 The Math team will continue to use features of the Data Wise Improvement Process (DWIP) along with the Plan-Do-Study-Act Continuous Improvement Cycle (PDSA) to improve teaching and learning. The FSC Administrative ELL Coach will provide on-going professional development to staff to help them understand and identify the strategies that they will use to support ELLs and SWDs during lessons We project that a minimum of 50% of students tested will demonstrate proficiency on each "Snapshot" assessment of the Standards that have been assessed Teacher lesson plans for implementation of Advanced Literacy Strategies. We project that a minimum of 50% of ENL/SWD students tested will demonstrate proficiency on each "Snapshot" assessment of the Standards that was assessed 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will engage parents by sharing data streams outcomes during the SLT and PA meetings. To promote teacher-parent/family collaborations parents will have access to Skedula/Pupil Path where they will have access to 2018-19 CEP-RISE 53  assignments, student progress behavioral concerns and parents can directly communicate and collaborate with teachers on a weekly and monthly basis. We will provide parents with monthly workshops that will support them with giving their child help at home with homework. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. We will commit Title I and Tax Levy funding to absorb the costs of the common preparation periods. Using Data Wise inquiry protocols strengthened by Turning Data into Actionable Information through team discussions to make meaningful modifications; Funding to provide a Peer Mentoring Structure to assist struggling teachers. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X X C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, we will increase the number of students performing at levels 2 and 3 in ELA and Math by a minimum of 7.5% and level 4 by 2.5% percent, as measured by the most current Ready NY Assessment data Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure will be the most current Ready NY Math and ELA Assessment data Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 54  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, SOP(s) Addressed Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). (aligned with Rise Key 2) Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. (aligned with Rise Key 6) 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. (aligned with Rise Key 1) 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). (aligned with Rise Keys 4 and 5) na na na X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? As a school community that has moved from Renewal to Rise, we have made significant improvement in our ability to strategically use data to monitor our progress, make timely adjustments, and to address the pedagogical needs of our teachers via professional learning activities. Each week, our administrative cabinet, which is inclusive of our Administration, Director of School Renewal (DSR), Community School Director, and Lead teachers, engage in progress monitoring activities that have enabled us to keep our finger on the pulse of our school’s performance. Regularly, our team analyzes iReady, Ready, MOSL, and student work products to track the performance of students across ALL subgroups, including our ELLs, SWDs, pushables, slip-ables, and high achievers, to determine if they are making progress. Additionally, on a regular basis, we review curricular artifacts, including unit and lesson plans, pacing calendars, and student work products to determine the degree to which our curriculum adequately engages students in learning activities that are rigorous, engaging, data-driven, and common core aligned, We also regularly use Data Wise protocols to examine our practices, come to consensus, and to create actionable next steps, at the school, grade/department, and classroom levels. Each week during and after our progress monitoring activities, teachers are provided with immediate actionable feedback and/or support. To that end, it is our belief that the progress monitoring systems and structures we have, are a strength in our practice. Our strengths in our practices include: 2018-19 CEP-RISE 55   Double period programming in literacy and math  Providing and monitoring AIS supports for our subgroups (High Achievers, Students with Disabilities, English language Learners and General Education students) within the school day, afterschool, Saturday Programs, and targeted academic boot camps  Tracking student performance in the Common Core Major/Power Standards weekly in math, literacy and science  Planning weekly professional learning activities for teachers around instructional planning of CCLS lessons, providing scaffolds for subgroups (HA, GE, ENL, SWD), Japanese lesson study, curricula planning and adjustments, reviewing student work products  Drafting and creating an assessment calendar  Conducting Daily instructional walkthroughs with feedback  Engaging in Ongoing data chats with teachers as it pertains to school level and observational data, including the teacher’s ability to plan Common Core aligned lessons and targeted supports to students via the station teaching model that we adopted this school year, as a part of our instructional focus  Modeling and establishing clear expectations for our Instructional focus  Establishing high expectations for staff and families via the Principal’s Weekly Bulletin and Parent Newletter  Dedicating time and space for our Instructional Leadership and Content Teams to meet weekly for 90 minutes, using the Data Wise Improvement Process to identify a learner centered problem, problem of practice, and a plan of action to address what teachers and student struggle with. Despite all of the effort that we have dedicated to providing teachers with high quality professional development, including the regular practice of giving teachers in-classroom coaching and support, our greatest challenge continues to be motivating our teachers to believe in themselves as competent practitioners. To that end, we have identified SOP 2.5 to be our priority need and the key lever that we will use to drive our leadership’s efforts to improve teacher practice. Our priority will be to support teachers in the areas of 1e, 3b, 3c and 3d through designing coherent instruction reflective of the common core standards and the instructional shifts. Providing targeted supports and scaffolds for all students with a specific focus on ENL and SWD’s through targeted small group instruction in, opportunities for rich classroom discussions, ongoing use of on the spot assessments throughout instruction, and providing explicit feedback to students during lessons, through one to one conferencing to students. These priority indicators will guide our leadership with continuing its laser-like focus on effectively using evidence based systems to examine and improve individual and school-wide practices around curricula, pedagogy, fostering teacher leadership, and improving our ability to increase parent engagement in the children’s educational experiences. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Effective School Leadership What is your vision for effective school leadership at your school? During the 2018-2019 school year, EFMS envisions that Leadership will have a clear vision that is laser-like, evidenced based, driven by coherent systems and structures that are consistent, collaborative, and sets high expectations sets student achievement. We will continue to use the Data Wise Improvement Process to gather, analyze and evaluate data in a systematic way to ensure that every decision is rooted in evidence to impact student learning. School leaders and ALL school-wide teams will implement the DATA WISE protocols and procedures to support:  Achieving our Benchmark and R+CEP goals  Improving our practices relative to our Instructional Focus, planning professional learning opportunities and parent activities Improving instruction in ALL content areas  Weekly progress monitoring activities   Debriefing learning walk findings  Prioritizing our school level, department/grade, and classroom next steps 2018-19 CEP-RISE 56    Improving our understanding of how inquiry supports our ability to make adjustments to curriculum and implement meaningful and impactful instructional strategies, including the use of appropriate scaffolds to improve student achievement Strengthen our AIS and ELT program, which will occur weekly on Tuesdays to Fridays (4 days) for 80 minutes. Students’ learning needs will be targeted based upon their specific skill gaps, and the following programs will be used to accelerate their growth: I-Ready o   ReadyNY  Mindplay  Matheletics  Apex Learning. Additionally, Our CBO, NYE will provide tutorial support with teacher guidance to support student learning during this time. Our leadership has carefully reflected on the teacher observation process and our systems for providing actionable feedback to teachers. With that said, we envision that school leadership will continue to conduct classroom walkthroughs daily, providing teachers with actionable feedback, using instructional a new “Look Fors” Document, which was collaboratively created with each teacher content team, to promote transparency, teacher ownership, and clear expectations for pedagogical practice. This “Look For” document will provide a specific focus around classroom environment, student engagement (including targeted small group tiered instruction to meet ALL student’s learning needs, scaffolds and extensions for ELLS, SWD, and at risk general education students, and high achievers), planning, alignment to the CCLS, and use of appropriate resources for ALL students. School leaders will provide teacher feedback and high leverage action steps within 48 hours with time bound next steps and follow-up support, if necessary. Weekly Professional Learning sessions will reflect classroom instructional walkthrough data, trends from Advance Observations, and teacher’s reflection of their own practice, to ensure improvement in teacher pedagogy across ALL content areas. Through the Data Wise Process and in-house inter-visitations, the Instructional Leadership team will develop a system of shared accountability to facilitate high expectations for rigorous and CCLS aligned instruction across content in all classrooms. At the outset of the school year, school leaders will review and clarify individual roles and responsibilities with the entire staff to ensure that all stakeholders have a clear understanding og their role in helping the school to achieve its goals. Additionally, each member and each staff member will develop personal goals that are time bound and reflective of our school’s instructional focus and R+CEP goals. These roles/responsibilities and goals will be reviewed with staff members by school leadership in January and February to determine each stakeholders growth and impact on student achievement. Based upon our overall findings, adjustments will be made to our Instructional Focus and/or R+CEP Goals, to accelerate our progress toward achieving our anticipated outcomes. Lastly, Leadership will collaborate with the Community School Director and Parent coordinator to create a Monthly Newsletter for families addressing student attendance, progress, behavioral expectations, and school wide events. Data examined to identify Newsletter content, will be collected from the New Visions Data Tool, Attendance Team, PBIS data, Parent Engagement Team Meetings and the Cultural Responsive Team. All data will be shared with the school community via Google Drive, and monitored by the Leadership Cabinet monthly to determine what supports exist, and which services can be put in place to address areas in need of improvement. , 2018-19 CEP-RISE 57  What are your core belief(s) for school improvement and how they inform your vision for developing instructional leadership at your school? As an educator, it is with strong belief that Determination + Perseverance+ Resilience= Success. To that end, it is my mission to ensure that the entire school community, inclusive of the administration, teachers, support staff, CBO partners, and the larger community work collaboratively to address the social, emotional, cultural, mental, and academic, needs of ALL students. To achieve this goal, the Leadership team of the school, which includes the ILT, will work on three key areas this year:  Consistency in all systems and structures with a focus on supervision and accountability.  Second, we will work on increased accountability in providing timely teacher feedback and support to improve teacher practice in the classroom and through weekly Professional Learning Finally, building teacher leadership capacity  ADDITION  Provide staff a Principal's Weekly Bulletin to ensure clear and transparent communication of the school’s vision, mission and instructional focus  Through consistent and ongoing professional learning opportunities and and staff meetings weekly that align and support the schools vision, mission and Instructional Focus  Through monthly SLT and CST meetings, to discuss and monitor our progress with supporting and achieving our school vision, mission, Instructional Focus and R+CEP goals  Through lead parent meetings(Chat and Chew)) once a month to ensure parent voice and contribution towards achievement of our school vision,mission and Instructional Focus  Through regular meetings with Student Government to ensure student voice is valued and contributed towards achievement of our school vision,mission and Instructional Focus What is your vision for developing differentiated leadership throughout your school? How will you utilize teacher leaders to build broad capacity within your school?  Our content teams will be facilitated by Teacher Leaders in each content to develop and foster teacher leadership capacity and leverage their expertise to support teachers during Professional Learning in effective teacher practice  Our Instructional Leadership Team will consist of the Teacher Leaders from each content area including teachers who work closely with SWD an ELL students, the DSR, and CSD.  Our BFSC will support our Content Teacher with monthly PL sessions that will be turn keyed to each content team How will the leader foster collaborative school governance processes, and ensure full family participation together with other stakeholders?  Through the PA , SLT, CST activities, parents will be given voice in all school wide governance processes  The Parent Coordinator, in collaboration with the CSD will produce a monthly newsletter and calendar that will be sent home to parents, informing them of all upcoming school wide decisions and events  A Student Government will be created, which students will facilitate.  The Principal with serve on the school’s Cabinet Team and PBIS/Attendance Teams to ensure that there is equity of voice and participation in school wide initiatives 2018-19 CEP-RISE 58  We will conduct school surveys at least 3 times a year to elicit staff, student and parents’ opinions on a variety of issues, including academics, school-wide systems and structures, as they connects to our school vision, mission and instructional focus, and cultural issues. How will you use evidence-based systems to ensure school and teacher leaders are led by a cycle of continuous learning and use this to inform their teams’ priorities? Evidence-Based System Support(s) Collaborator(s) All school wide decisions will be rooted in evidence; we will use DATA WISE protocols and policies to ensure consistency, congruency and collaboration throughout the year. Data Wise protocols, systems, and procedures to guide all next steps, recommendations and actions plans to improve student outcomes AP, ILT, DSR, BFSC and CSD. ReadyNY Mock assessments and I -ready online assessments To identify trends in student learning and plan accordingly to address all learners needs through small targeted learning groups Inter-visitiations, Administrative Learning Walks, Professional learning and targeted professional learning. School leader will track actionable feedback and instructional recommendations that are SMART Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 59  By June 2019, as a result of using Data Wise systems, structures and protocols, we will decrease the number of SWDs and ELL students performing at level 1 by 20% percent in mathematics and literacy as measured by the NYS ELA and Math exams. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Increase performance index on state exam ELA and Math Increased proficiency rating ELA and Math Impact student learning by 40% student demonstrating 1 year or more growth in ELA and Math 2018-19 CEP-RISE 60 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All Teachers Increase performance index on ELA and Math exams Sept 2018 June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Community Schools Director, DSR, Teacher Leads, Teachers All Teachers Increase performance index on state ELA and Math exams Sept 2018 June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, DSR, ANet Coach, Instructional Leadership Team How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) We project that a minimum of 50% of our ELLs and SWDs will demonstrate proficiency on the Snapshot assessment. We project that a minimum of 50% of our ELLs and SWDs will demonstrate proficiency on the Snapshot assessment Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. The Leadership an Instructional Team will work together using features of the Data Wise protocols and procedures along with the Plan-Do-Study-Act Continuous Cycle to develop a system to effectively plan for tiered activities, multiple points of entry, and appropriate scaffolds for ELLs and SWDs. The Principal and Instructional Leadership Team will work collaboratively with the Achievement Network to address and support instructional practices across all content areas to improve pedagogy and student learning outcomes for ELL's and SWD's. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 61  The Principal, and Assistant Principal will conduct a minimum of 2-3 classroom instructional walk-throughs weekly and observe instructional practice with a focus lens of how teachers are meeting the learning needs of ELL's and SWD's in the classroom and daily lesson planning. Teacher Lesson Plans and student work products focusing on ENL and SWD's. ALL Teachers increase performance index on state ELA and Math exams Sept. 2018 June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, DSR, ANet Coach, Content Teacher Leads The SLT and Leadership will conduct monthly meetings to discuss the following: vision mission school goals the systems and structures curriculum and initiatives put in place to impact and improve student achievement Parents, Parent Coordinator, Principal, CSD, PTA President, UFT, DC-37, Teachers, Students Increase performance index on state ELA and Math exams Sept. 2018 June 2019 Principal, SLT Chairperson, PTA President, PC, UFT, DC-37, Teachers, CSD Increased Attendance and Parents Review student performance on ReadyNY Math & ELA Assessments, and Student Reflection snapshot analysis tool for math and ELA with a focus on ENL and SWD's. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 62  4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will engage parents and families through: Monthly PA Meetings - PC Monthly SLT meetings - PA President and PA Board Monthly CST meetings - CSD, PA members, School Leadership Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. We will leverage the time of the Principal, Assistant Principals, Director of Community Schools, Achievement Network and Parent Coordinator to reach these goals. We will commit the resources of IO Datacation, ReadyNY, and I-Ready progress indicators to ensure that this annual goal is met. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 63  By February 2019, we will decrease the number of SWDs and ELL students performing at level 1 by a minimum of 10 percent in mathematics and literacy as measured by the the most current Ready NY Assessment Data and or MOSL Data Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure will be the NYS ELA and Math Ready NY Assessment and/or MOSL Data Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 64  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. (aligned with Rise Key 2) 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. (aligned with Rise Key 4 and 6) 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. (aligned with Rise Key 5) 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. (aligned with Rise Key 3) na X na na Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? As a school community, Ebbets Field Middle School has taken significant steps to engage our parents in becoming equal partners in educating their children and supporting their family needs within our school community. Evidence of our work was reflected in most recent LES, where our survey results for the Strong Family and Community Ties increased from a score of 1.0 from 2017-2018 school year to 3.87 in the 2017-2018 school year. Our school's strength in this element in the Framework of Great schools has been in creating a welcoming environment for parents, having an open door policy in addressing their concerns and building positive and collaborative relationships with them and the larger school community. This collaboration was evident in this year's Parent Surveys and in our Community Forum, where parents highlighted the relationships they've established with our teachers. Parents feel that our teachers make an extra effort to keep them abreast of not only their child's areas of concern, but also with their academic successes. They've expressed that they feel that their children are safe when they are in school and that the school community cares not only for their children's well-being but theirs as well. They expressed appreciation for the monthly Chat and Chew meetings with the principal, which gives them an opportunity to meet informally with the principal who to openly share their concern, and express the things they would like to see implemented in the school community. Though we have taken huge steps to forge bonds of trust with our parents, building trust with all families continues to be a challenging area. We have made significant efforts to engage and increase participation on our Parent Association (PA) Board and among the members of our SLT. Our school community and leadership has worked on improving our active listening and being reflective about the needs and concerns of our parents. To engage our parents, this year we have done the following:  Worked to ensure that parents feel welcomed when they enter the school building and feel they are actively involved in the decisions made for the school community through our monthly PA and SLT meets  Distributed parent surveys to assess what parents need and would like additional support with 2018-19 CEP-RISE 65   Through our CBO partner NYE we continue to support parents with the following workshops around bullying, use and monitoring of social media, parenting in the 21st century, positive behavioral supports at home, locating and providing adequate services to support family needs, financial planning, employment resources, etc.  Provided parents with a resource center/space that is accessible during school hours and after-school where parents can utilize computers and meet with community partners that can support them with their needs.  Provided translations serves for our diverse group of parents within our school community  Distributed Monthly Newsletters and calendars   Continued communication through letters, school messenger, email blasts, social media sites such as twitter and Facilitated Monthly “Chat and Chew” meeting s with the Principal instragram of upcoming events at the school  Used Pupil Path and Skedula to allow parents real-time access to their students’ progress and achievement with regards to both academic and behavioral performance.  Organized a number events that engage parents and celebrate student success such as Student Achievements through academics and attendance, College trips both locally and out of state, Arts performances, Dinner of Success, Awards Ceremonies, Poetry Nights, and family events such as Game Nights, Family Paint Night etc.. Our priority need at this time is to continue SOP 6.3 in order to create reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders, so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. In our recent Community Forum parents expressed the following as priorities in our school community:  More events that are culturally based that reflect the diversity within our community  Conducting PA meetings both in the morning and the evening to accommodate all our parents and using the internet to engage parents in our PA meetings as well to keep parents up to date and abreast of what is happening in our school community and providing access to those parents who may not be available  Conduct parent Appreciation Dinners at least twice a year in the fall and the spring to highlight our parents successes  Create a Community Resources Center where parent can have access to various community organization that can provide support and information that are of concern to our parents such as health, housing, employment, immigration concerns, parenting support etc. Supporting the PA in providing guest speakers from the community to share and provide information of concern to our parents on a bi-monthly basis through Town Hall meetings   Having our teachers engage our parents more through weekly phone calls and or parent meetings to discuss their child's progress and providing parents with workshops specifically around the curriculum used in classrooms and the Common Core Standards  Provide our PA a voice in our monthly newsletters to parents  Providing child care services for parents during events and PA meetings so our parents have an opportunity to  participate while their children are actively engaged in activities while our parents attend meetings Incorporating more family oriented events where parents can engage with their children and members in the school community such as game, movie, arts & crafts events and talent shows where both students and parents can show case their talents We see our parents as equal partners in our school community and their concerns and voice are valued in every decision that is made for our school community. We will continue to engage and empower our parents through ongoing dialogue in supporting the needs of their children.. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Strong Family and Community Ties What is your vision for strong family and community ties at your school? What opportunities exist for the school staff to know the students and their families in order to better communicate and partner with families and communities in the vision for the school? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 66  We know that community connections and building a relationships of trust are paramount to our success. We envision a school that embraces the notion that all members of the community are a vital and integral part of the school’s success. We envision a school where all parents and stakeholders feel welcome and:  where our parents are seen as partners that are empowered to have a voice and are engaged in all aspects of our school community  where cultural diversity is seen as a strength to our learning community  where differences in language communication can be supported to provide parents the necessary access all school wide data, workshops and events.  Where families have the opportunity to engage with the School Leader monthly during the first Monday of the month in ou month Chat and Chews  provides our families with a comprehensive array of social services to meet their needs and that of their children  provides access to be involved and contribute to decisions that involve their well-being and that of their children  where our PA, School Leaders, Community School Director, parent coordinator along with community partners work collaboratively to discuss, create and implement a plan of action for engaging parents in our school community are provided consistent and ongoing support with understanding the impact of the Common Core and Next Generation standards to their child's learning an academic success   providing parents support and access to college and career readiness  providing parents coordinated access to various community services to improve their quality of life and that of  their children as an affiliate school we are apart of the Medgar Evers College community where our students and parents will have access to STEM courses, parent workshops and other Medgar Evers College educational opportunities  where parents have access to teachers and are where teachers are in ongoing communication with parents about their child progress and providing support with understanding the curriculum being taught  providing a dedicated space for parents that is a safe haven to engage with teachers, other parents and community organizations that can support their children We envision our school community being a second family for our parents and students where they feel nurtured and supported and see us as equal partners who are here to put their interests and that of their children at the forefront of every decision that is made for our school community. Within the Community School model, how will families be welcomed into the school and made a part of the school community? What support will administrators, teachers, school staff and school safety officers be given to help create a welcoming environment? Will there be a dedicated space for families in the school? All stakeholders are expected to welcome all families at all times. There is a Parent Resource Center established for parents in room 306 where families can receive support as needed, meet with teachers, administrators and engage in educational workshops and meet with parents on an ongoing basis. The CSD is an integral part of our school community that provides families relevant support as needed. There is an open door policy for all families and parents who are welcome to met with the school leadership at anytime to discuss areas of concern success as it relates to their children and the school community. How will the school identify and develop families to take leadership roles in school decision making/school governance structures? With the support of the PA Executive Board and the Parent Coordinator we will identify parents to be trained by the CSD to serve in leadership roles and be active members on committees. Through our partnerships with our SLT, CST, 2018-19 CEP-RISE 67  Leadership Cabinet, PA board and other committees, we hope to positively impact learning and communication across our school community. How will the school engage the community and families? How will they ensure that teachers are able to learn from families about the children being taught? Each teacher has dedicated parent engagement periods within their daily schedule. These periods will be monitored to ensure that parents are being contacted, key information is turn-keyed, and parents have an active voice in their child’s development. In addition, we will have scheduled monthly parent workshops centered around parent needs/concerns, academic , and social/emotional themes led by our parent coordinator, in conjunction with our Lead CBO NYE, and other community partners. Lastly, we will work diligently to ensure that parents are active participants during the quarterly parent-teacher conferences we intend to host. During these conference, parents will have an opportunity to engage with teachers regarding their child's academic progress, and how they can support them with addressing their areas for improvement at home. How do families partner with the school and CBO to support student success? Will there be dedicated space for families? Family partnerships with school: The Parent Resource Center is a space that has beendesignated for parents and families to collaborate with school staff and one another. Parents also partner with ourCBOpartners, through monthly CST, SLT, Chat and Chew with the principal, and PA Meetings. Family partnerships with CBO: MedgarEversAdult Education and ESLPrograms Is there dedicated space for these partnerships? Yes - room 306 What data and student progress feedback loops will be present at the school to ensure that families knowledgeable of their children’s scholastic success, in addition to report cards? We will send home progress reports daily and monthly through Skedula/Pupil Path , which are online communication services. Our PC will call parents daily/monthly as needed, to make sure they have received progress reports, or have logged onto SKEDULA through Pupil Path. Student advisors will contact parents weekly, to discuss their child's academic progress, and/or any social/emotional concerns that have arisen. During Parent Teacher conferences, students will use their portfolios to take the lead in discussing their progress, areas for improvement, and their goals/next steps for improvement with their families. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 68 By June 2019, through our partnerships with families and community organizations, we expect a minimum of 20% increase in family attendance at school wide events, including parental engagement time and/or PA meetings, as evidenced by parent sign in sheets, parent assistance logs and/or teacher parent outreach logs. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Increase performance index on state exam ELA and Increased proficiency rating ELA and Math Increased Attendance 2018-19 CEP-RISE 69  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. The Parent Coordinator will plan and host a minimum five parent workshops based on the parent needs survey conducted in September 2018 with a focus on CCLS & instructional shifts, curriculum, health and wellness, child development, family activities, etc. Parents will be be supported with Language translation in Haitian Creole, Arabic, and Spanish NYE and the Parent Coordinator will organize and coordinate 5 parent workshops with a focus on providing parents access to community organizations that will support parent needs identified in Parent surveys taken at the beginning of the school Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Administration, Content Lead Teachers, Community Schools Director, Parent Coordinator, and teachers All parents and students Increase performance index on state exam ELA and Math 10/2018 to 6/2019 Increased Attendance Parents and stakeholders. Increase performance index on state exam ELA and Math 10/2018 6/2019 Administration, CSD, Parent Coordinator, CBO partnerships Increased Attendance How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Attendance Sign in logs, Parent workshop agendas and parent surveys Attendance sign in logs, parent workshop agendas and parent surveys 2018-19 CEP-RISE 70  year and academic workshops to support parents with the CCLS in ELA and Math. All Parents, and Community Stakeholders The Parent Coordinator will manage and supervise the Parent Resource Center by recruiting community organizations to participate in the center, sharing center resources with parents, and scheduling service appointments with parents. Increase performance index on state exam ELA and Math Sept 2018 Administration, CBO, Teachers May 2019 Increased Attendance The Parent Coordinator will serve as a liaison for parents of students in temporary housing (STH), and will be an active participant on Increased Attendance Mar. 2019 All Parents, Community Stakeholders Increase performance index on state exam ELA and Math Oct 2018 Dec 2018 Feb 2019 Community School Director; Parent Coordinator; Administration Guidance Parent Appointment Logs, Parent resource binder, Parent Attendance Sign in logs and parent surveys Parent Phone logs, Parent Conference log of Assistance, Minutes from Parent Association Meetings, 2018-19 CEP-RISE 71  the Leadership Cabinet Team, Student Support Success Team, School Improvement Team (SIT), SLT, PBIS and Attendance Teams in order to create monthly parent newsletter and calendar and provide parental support daily as needed. We will identify parent leaders through our PA Executive Board. These parents will attend PA meetings, recruit additional parents to attend PA meetings, conduct parent education workshops and build relationships with family stakeholders in our school community. They will provide meaningful feedback to our PC and administration about how our in-house systems that can be improved to serve the needs of all stakeholders. Increase performance index on state exam ELA and Math All Parents Increased Attendance May 2019 Social Worker Community School Director; Parent Coordinator; Administration, Monthly Parent Newsletter and Calendars. Parent Attendance Sign logs, and PA Agendas and minutes Sept. 2018 - June 2019 PA Board 2018-19 CEP-RISE 72  Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. We will use and leverage the services of our CBO - NYE, the Instructional Leadership Teams, Parent Coordinator and Medgar Evers College, and Turnaround Arts to achieve this goal. These items will be scheduled into the school calendar and will be well-publicized. Parents who attend will be provided with Metro cards and refreshments. Books , resources, materials and related instructional supplies will be supplied by the school. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding 2018-19 CEP-RISE 73  Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2018, we will increase parent engagement by 10 percent, through the development of additional collaborative partnerships with families and community organizations evidenced by parental assistant logs, teacher parent logs and attendance sign-in sheets. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will measure our success by:  Parent workshop sign-in sheets  Parent Conference sign-in sheets  PA Attendance sign-in sheets  Teacher weekly parent engagement logs Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 74  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environments, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Goals for ELT should aligned to the Rise Benchmarks. How will the school will ensure that all students’ individual needs are served during the Rise ELT and how the school’s vision for ELT will impact both academic achievement and social emotional growth? Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of using the I-Ready online reading and mathematics programs, we project that 50% of our students tested will demonstrate proficiency on the I-READY Assessment. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 75  2018-19 CEP-RISE 76  2018-19 CEP-RISE 77  2018-19 CEP-RISE 78  1. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 79  2018-19 CEP-RISE 80  2018-19 CEP-RISE 81  Part 2 – ELT Program Type 2018-19 CEP-RISE 82  Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? Voluntary X Compulsory Rise ELT – Describe what accountability structures the school will employ to ensure participation of all students, including special populations, will participate fully in Rise ELT. Additional ELT - If there is a voluntary ELT program in addition to the compulsory Rise ELT, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. Our ELT structure will be at the end of our school day from Tuesdays through Fridays for 80 minutes each day. School administrators and teachers will communicate the RISE Expectations for ALL students including SWD, ENL and high achievers that participate in ELT with our families, along with school/student level data. Student permission slips will be sent home to parents highlighting the purpose and expectations of the program and its impact on student achievement towards proficiency. With the support of the SLT, PA and CBO, school administrators will inform parents and students about school data and the initiatives that have been put in place to support and improve student outcomes. Parents and students will be informed at the beginning of the school year about their child(ren's) academic data and the supports that will be in place to improve their child(ren's) achievement. Monthly data reports and conferencing logs will be provided to students and parents so that they can both monitor the student's progress and achievement toward proficiency. School administrators will conduct daily walkthroughs to monitor instruction, and they will track student progress, by reviewing assessment benchmarks on bi-weekly basis. School Leaders will have monthly one to one data chats with teachers regarding their students' data to develop actionable next steps for student improvement and growth. Our NYE will help to track individual and school wide progress, and they will provide incentives to students to highlight their weekly/monthly achievements. Part 3 – ELT Program Description Target Population: The ELT program for a Rise School will be offered to all students in the school. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program: How will the school integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging? How will CBO staff and the school’s teachers be integrated to provide a seamless learning day?  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduces risk for retention or drop out, and increases the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  What new content areas and opportunities will be offered to students? How will the school ensure all IEP and language mandates are met during ELT?  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  How will community educators receive professional development? Are there plans to provide joint PD to school faculty and community partner staff?  What content will be led by pedagogical staff and what content will be led by CBO partners?  How will the school best utilize CBO partners to impact student achievement?  How will effective outreach be conducted to families?  How will programming be made easily accessible to students and families in order to encourage participation? In order to offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning to promote higher attendance, reduced risks for retention, and increase the likelihood of graduation, the ELT program at Ebbets Field Middle School will be held at the end of the school day, giving our effective teachers the opportunity to provide instructional support to students in small targeted instructional groups to provide additional support to students, addressing their skill gaps, and helping them to develop stronger analytical skills in understanding complex text both in literary and informational text, and their conceptual understanding in both Literacy and Math. These 2018-19 CEP-RISE 83  strategies will create an environment where ALL students learning needs, including those of our ELLs and SWDs can be tailored to what students need. Our CBO partner NYE will provide tutors who will work closely with teachers during ELT to support students as well. They too, will lead small instructional groups via CCLS aligned activities that were co-planned with teachers, to support our students. Tutors and Teachers will participate in joint professional learning activities on bi-weekly Mondays, to review and analyze students data, and plan instructional supports for students in ELA and Math. Tutors will also lead enrichment activities such as that are reflective of student interests and that support the social and emotional development of our students. Families will be informed of the types of enrichment activities that will be offered, through a monthly schedule that will be communicated to students during advisory periods and during weekly motivational meetings on Mondays and Fridays. Below are a list of the activities/supports that will be offered to students during ELT:  Imagine Learning Program (ELT) -All ELL’s- Via Imagine Learning Program, every child receives explicit, targeted instruction within an individualized learning path that continually adjusts to their needs through over 4,300 engaging activities that teach critical language and literacy concepts such as reading and listening comprehension, basic vocabulary, academic language, grammar, phonological awareness, phonics, and fluency. It’s differentiated, standards-aligned, and rigorous.  Mathletics – Math- Level 1 & 2- ELT- Friday- via Small Group Instruction and Conferencing - Mathletics is a captivating online math learning space providing students with all the tools they need to be successful learners, both in the classroom and beyond. This online program is adaptive and provides CCLS aligned lessons (K-12) that provide students with a set of interactive activities that address their learning gaps. . Mathletics supports and caters to each teacher’s unique blend of student-driven learning and teacher-led instruction.  Mindplay – ELA - Level 1 & 2– (ELT)- Thursdays- Via small group instruction and conferencing - Mindplay is an effective online reading program that provides tier 1 & 2 intervention and remediation. It improves students reading abilities by providing phonemic awareness, phonics, vocabulary, grammar for meaning, fluency and comprehension. It permits students with diverse skills and unique needs to read with control and precision.  Apex -Math/ELA -Level 3 & 4- (ELT)-Thursday(ELA)/Friday(Math)- Apex is designed to support all students in achieving their potential through intervention and remediation while providing rigorous and accelerated learning. This interactive program meets students where they are while engaging them in grade level CCLS content. via small group instruction and conferencing- iReady - All Students – (ELT) -Tuesday(ELA)/Wednesday(Math)-Individualized computer-assisted instruction in Reading and Math will be provided to students along with small group Instruction and Conferencing, which will be provided by teachers an/or CBO tutors.  The following are a lost of the Enrichment activities that will be provided through NYE, will include: Step Sports such as soccer, basketball, track, volleyball Improvisational Drama - Irondale  Public Speaking   Chess  Coding  Graphic Design  Dance/Cheer leading    Mentoring  Girls and Boys support group   Community Service Projects  Cooking Club   African Drumming  Drumline  Art – photography and Visual arts. Leadership Development Fashion/Jewelry design 2018-19 CEP-RISE 84  Theatrical Drama - Broadway Jr. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. How will the school assess the impact of ELT on individual student achievement and social emotional development? 2. 3. As mentioned above, ELT will be held at the end of our school day from 2:40pm - 3:55pm on Tuesdays through Fridays . It will be supervised by the administrative team. During this team teachers will provide targeted instruction to students. In addition, our lead CBO NYE, will hire eight tutors, who will push into classrooms and provide individualized and targeted support. Administrators and our CSD will conduct observations in classrooms to monitor the quality of instruction/activities; and they will monitor and analyze student data on a bi-weekly or monthly basis, to assess progress. They will also review student data chat conferencing logs , along with monitoring teacher instruction daily . Administrators will engage in one to one conferencing with teachers to discuss student data and implications for instruction. Administrators will also meet with students weekly, targeting our SWDs and ELLs to discuss their conferencing logs, progress, and next steps for improvement. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. This program will start in September 2018 and run through the last day of school in June 2019. All students will participate in the program on Tuesdays through Fridays, from 2:40pm to 3:55pm Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. Our ELT will be staffed by teachers and NYE Tutors. Instructional resources will be provided to all classrooms to support all students in literacy and Math. Eight teachers and 8 tutors will be hired to staff the program. Funding for the program will be provided through the school budget and our CBO, NYE. ELT will be funded will be provided through Title I, Title III, and CBO funding. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. X 21st Century Title I 1003(a) X X Tax Levy X Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA SIG Grant P/F Set-aside C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 85  We will evaluate the quality of services provided during our ELT program every four weeks, during our Progress Monitoring meetings, to assess impact on student achievement, using Data Wise protocols. By February 2019, there will be a minimum decrease of 7.5% in the number of students performing at levels 1 and 2 respectively, as evidenced by our most recent i-Ready diagnostic data. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use the following to assess progress:  iReady Diagnostic Assessments Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 86  Section 7: Community School Description Directions: The Community School strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – The Community School Program Goal(s) How is the Community School strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? Our Community School program is seamlessly embedded into the fabric of the school. As such, discussions are held with teachers and instructional staff around academic themes, projects or other activities, to help to inform the overall academic focus within the school. The Community School Director and the Site Director for the Department of Youth and Community Development (DYCD) funded after school program actively participate in the Principal’s Cabinet and ILT meetings and related committees to ensure that they are an integral part of our planning and progress monitoring processes. Ongoing collaboration and coordination between our administrative cabinet, ILT, and CBO partners will ensure that there is alignment throughout the school day between our regular school day and ELT activities. Through our collaboration, community school staff will “push in” during ELT activities to provide small group and iReady support to students during the after school program. Our administration and Lead CBO partner, NYE will also collaborate regarding the hiring of school day teachers, to serves as Educational Coordinators. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019: 1) Overall student attendance will increase from 91.2% to 92% and the number of chronically absent students will be reduced by 2% from 15% to 13%, as measured by ATS and the new Visions Data Portal Heat Map. 2) The number of parents participating in events/activities will increase by 20%, as measured by attendance sheets for parent activities. 3) Students will regularly participate in expanded learning activities by achieving an average daily attendance of 85, as measured by our ELT attendance logs. 4) The Community School Director will work with mental health counselor/social worker and other school based supports to reduce the number of level 1 and level 2 incidents reported by OORS reports . Level 1 incidents will decrease by 25% from 30 incidents to 24 incidents and Level 2 incidents will decrease by 25% from 4 to 3, as evidenced by the OORS reports Please answer the following question as it relates to meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 87  The goals were selected because, they support and align with our RCEP goals. The goals are intended to build upon an agreed approach. It is therefore anticipated that the achieving the proposed outcomes will further enhance and add value to EFMS's overall mission. Additionally, the goals will independently and collectively help to address the key barriers and performance that are currently interfering with student academic progress, by positively impacting student attendance and our overall student performance indices and proficiency ratings respectively. Part 2 – Community School Program Description Part 2a. Identify the CBO partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service NYE All Students Tutoring and Intervention; family advisement and empowerment; after school recreation Partnership with Children All students Restorative Practices and PBIS Interboro Psychiatric Targeted Students and Families Center for Supportive Schools Grade 6 and Grade 8 NYE/Parent Coordinator/Principal All Parents Provides an array of mental health, social and emotional services Nationally acclaimed peer guidance connection empowering grade 8 students to serve as mentors to grade 6 students. Creates a parent empowerment and education program that enables parents to know and understand their roles as partners in their children’s education. Will support school-wide parent & family activities, special events and workshops with community Partners throughout the 2018-2019 school year. Part 2b. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. 2. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 88  3. 4. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 1. The process for selecting the Community School Director was highly collaborative involving all key stakeholders. The process involved jointly agreeing on key responsibilities, qualifications and credentials. The process for conducting an asset and needs assessment and coordinating activities are tasks that have been identified as critical to the implementation of the Community Schools strategy at MS 352. With support from the Lead CBO, and school leadership the expectation will be shared with the entire school community. The Community School Director will lead the process involving key participants among teachers, staff, student and their families along with other CBO partners. The Community School Director will report back to the school community, sharing the results of the work and how the information will ultimately be translated into an action plan. Additionally, the Community School Director will lead meetings collaboratively with school leadership with various CBO and community providers to establish the process for ensuring alignment, support and effective impact to the school community for all stakeholders. 2. 352K Community School will seek to ensure that all services, supports and opportunities are coordinated and connected regardless of the funding source or partner. It will fall upon the Community School Director with ongoing support from the school leadership and the lead CBO supervisor to develop the mechanisms for identifying which students will receive specified academic and social emotional supports. Academic supports will be specific to students learning needs and supported by tutors during students extended learning time. Tutorial supports will be specific and targeted in addressing student learning gaps in order to improve students outcomes. Tutors along with CBO partners will support, foster and develop students learning interests by providing them with hands-on project based learning where students are able to collaborate, problem solve and think critically. Students social and emotional needs will be addressed through out the school day as needed through ongoing counseling services and additional services will be provided by CBO partners . The Community School Director will serve as the point person to ensure that current structures such as the Student Success Support Team and Attendance Team Meetings are streamlined and that information is shared continuously regarding interventions, supports and progress. It is the expectation that other CBO providers such as NYE, Partnership With Children, College Access for All, and Interboro Mental Health Counseling Services actively and collaboratively participate in this effort. 3. The monthly Community Schools Team Meetings provide an avenue for all stakeholders within the school community to engage and work collaboratively to support the needs of all students and families. Parents will be actively recruited with the support of the Parent Association to the CST, so they are integral part of the decisions made for out school community. To support families in being active and engaged participants parents will have opportunities to attend and participate a variety of workshops and events throughout the school year which that will allow parents to engage in conversations about what they feel should be apart of our learning community that 2018-19 CEP-RISE 89  supports student achievement and success. The Community School Director will work closely with the Parent Coordinator and the Parent Association to not only support their work but to find opportunities to enhance their efforts by investing financial and human resources. Ongoing communication and collaboration will be implemented to ensure that families feel valued, respected and welcomed. 4. An expectation has already been established that the Community School Director meets with the Principal in a weekly check-in, participates in our Instructional Leadership Team and Progress Monitoring. Within the weekly check-in meetings with the Principal we discuss community partnerships that will benefit our school community academically, social emotionally and provide our students and families with enriching experiences. Through weekly Progress Monitoring we review student data with a specific focus on school based tutor support, monitoring student progress and creating next steps where we leverage our community school support to improve student outcomes. Through bi-monthly meetings with New Visions and the Administrative Team we take an in-depth look at our student attendance with a specific focus on severely chronic and at risk students to monitor and track the interventions put in place for attendance improvement. We also review and monitor our slipable and pushable students by analyzing interventions prescribed to support student progress. Our CSD serves as the point person in collaboration with the principal who monitors and tracks supports and interventions provided. During our ILT meetings our CSD is an integral part of our Data Wise Process in order to establish a better understanding of our students needs in order to provide adequate supports that will improve student achievement. . Rich Text Editor, 4294 Rich Text Editor, 4294 Rich Text Editor, 4294 Part 3 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 3a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 1. It is the intention of 352K to do the following:     Implement the Success Mentors initiative to work with students at risk of or chronically absent. Lead and monitor the Attendance Team and determine next steps toward progress and improvement of students daily, weekly and monthly attendance . Implement the use of the Data Sorter. Ensure that key staff are trained and that there is a comfort level with using the data to inform the work Implement a school wide attendance initiative that will include incentives for individual students and classes, assembly celebrations highlighting attendance, and academic performance. Actively seek to engage 2018-19 CEP-RISE 90  parents/caregivers in the effort to improve attendance through ongoing outreach (phone calls, emails and home visits)  Provide tutorial support through small targeted group instruction during ELT  Provide on site mental health counseling through Interboro Mental Health Counseling Services daily to assess and support student needs  Work collaboratively with Partnership with Children in implementing and supporting Restorative Practices  within the school community Support in providing enrichment activities for students supporting their interests (Irondale, Ifetayo Cultural Center, Elite Visions, MTA Mentoring Program, Heruniversity) Several partners will support the community school work.. NYE will leverage resources and partnership opportunities through our DYCD funded after school program. The CSD will lead the effort and will continue to organize supports and opportunities for parents and families by reaching out to potential partners. The process of identifying additional partners will be an ongoing effort. 2. The Community School Team Meetings will be comprised of key stakeholders in the 352K community. The members will include the Principal, Assistant Principal, Restorative Practices Director, After-School Program Director, Parent Coordinator, PA President, Teachers, Parents, and Community Based Organization Partners. Meetings will be held on a monthly basis and will use data from various sources (ex. Data sorter, OORS, iReady, ReadyNY etc) to make informed decisions about student and family supports. Members of the team will be responsible establishing goals that are reflective of the school community and its stakeholders. These goals will be monitored monthly with a specific focus around their impact on students’ academic achievement, social emotional well being, health and family needs. Part 3b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. 352K Community Schools will want to use the budget and human resources (Tutors) to creatively address the needs of students during ELT with a specific focus in Math and ELA using ReadyNY Resources. Additionally, we will want support to ensure that we can effectively implement the Community Schools strategy of organizing all of the financial and human resources Part 3c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. June 2018 -August 2018 – Visioning, Budget Development, Marketing, Recruitment of staff and Partner Meetings September 2018 – December 2018 – Phase 1 – Marketing/Initial Program Implementation January 2019 – June 2019 - Phase 2 – Programs continue. Needs Assessment. CS Forum Part 3d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this R-CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 91  Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) All students are regularly assessed using the BOY, Benchmark, EOY assessment, I-ready and other assessment data to determine their performance and instructional needs and weaknesses. Once struggling students are identified the appropriate program or strategy is applied. Mathematics All students are regularly assessed using the BOY, benchmark, EOY assessment, I-ready and other assessment data to Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) I- ready (computer based diagnostic and instruction program) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Whole class When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the regular school day -small groups -Great leaps -One on one tutorial -Small group Instruction- Pullout -Translanguaging - Frayer Models -MyOn -Teachers College Writing program -Interactive word walls -Vocabulary builder activities - Word of the week -Scholastic - On the Record Guided Reading Program I-ready(computer based diagnostic and instruction program) Whole class During the regular school day. -small groups - Small Group Instruction -One on one tutorial 2018-19 CEP-RISE 92  Science determine their performance and instructional needs and weaknesses. Once struggling students are identified the appropriate program or strategy is applied . Assessment data from the BOY assessment and other ongoing assessments are used to inform student grouping -Translanguaging - Math remedial Class Small Group Instruction Pullout Whole Class Small Group - Translanguaging - Socratic Discussions During the regular school day. -hands on projects Social Studies Assessment data from the BOY assessment and other ongoing assessments are used to inform student grouping -SMART Science -MyOn Small Group Whole Class During the Regular School day. - Translanguaging Small Group -hands on projects -My On At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) State mandates, Individualized education plans, teacher referrals, outside referrals Mandated counseling Whole class During the regular school day - At Risk Counseling Small group -Peer Mediation - Teacher Referrals -Conflict Resolution - Crisis Intervention -PBIS 2018-19 CEP-RISE 93  -Satellite Mental Health Clinic 2018-19 CEP-RISE 94  Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We estimate the number of students who live in Temporary Housing to be roughly 20 percent of our population. We base this number on the fact that many of our students are doubled-up and parents are not forth coming about their situations. We based this data on interviews with our parent coordinator, guidance team, PA President, and CSD. In addition, we have learned of at least fifteen students who were doubled-up with family 2018-19 CEP-RISE 95  2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Whenever we know a student qualifies as (Students in Temporary Housing (STH) we provide: Metrocards, uniforms, lunch and snack, book bags and all school materials including pencils, pens, notebooks, loose leaf, etc. In addition, we provide counseling and support where needed and where received. Students are also encouraged to participate in after school and referred to outside medical resources for glasses, dental, etc. through faith based organizations. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 96 N/A 2018-19 CEP-RISE 97  Section 10: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Administration will attend the Renewal Schools recruitment event. Participation in this event is a great opportunity to hire early and meet our goal of being fully staffed by August 1st. Select Recruits, top-tier candidates, and NYC Teaching Fellows will be in attendance. Teachers will be assigned as per the UFT contract regarding retention and within the parameters of their licenses. Professional development will be provided from BFSC Coaches in Math, ELA, Special Education and ENL, Teachers College, Turn Around Arts, PBIS Science, Passport Curriculum, Teachers will develop and implement inquiry-based learning activities that are culturally responsive for students that include both in classroom and community based learning experiences. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Teachers: Weekly Monday professional learning sessions , external professional learning sessions for all teachers when and where appropriate, instructional support, curriculum planning, Data Chats, TurnAround Arts and BFSC professional learning support - Math, ENL, ELA and Special Education UDL strategies Administrators: Renewal School Professional Learning Programs, Advance Professional Learning and District Level professional learning sessions. Paraprofessionals: Monday Professional Learning - Instructional support, BIP/FBA support for BFSC, TCIS training, Great Leaps Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 98  N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). NA 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. We rely on a distributed leadership model of decision making in our school. Our instructional leadership team includes content lead teachers, the Community School Director, Restorative Coordinator, Afterschool Program Director and the Parent Coordinator. All participants attend weekly meetings with the principal utilize the DWIP to discuss review school wide data to identify areas of growth, areas of concerns, and next steps. The UFT hold regular consultation meetings where they have input through surveys, and feedback regarding instructional decisions in our building. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (R-CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 99  Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local school allocation amounts) 166,959 16979 16143 0 12366 0 1,341002 Column A Verify with an (X) x NA X NA X 0 X Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5, 6 Section 5, 7, 8 Section 6 NA Section 5, 6 0 Section 5 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH). 2018-19 CEP-RISE 100   Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/R-CEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 101  Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current R-CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 17K352, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Ebbets Field Middle School will support parents and families of Title I students by: · providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; · providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; · fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; · providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 102  · sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; · providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: · actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; · engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; · ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; · support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; · maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; · conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; · provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 103  · host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary Act (ESSA); · schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; · translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; · conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: · holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference · hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; · encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; · supporting or hosting Family Day events; · establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; · encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; · providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; · developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; · providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) 17K352, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2018-19 CEP-RISE 104  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;  using academic learning time efficiently;    offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships     conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;   providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff  member; arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by:   creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); 2018-19 CEP-RISE 105   sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  Monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games;     promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;   participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;   become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department         learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities attend school regularly and arrive on time; complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; show respect for myself, other people and property; try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 106  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP-RISE 107  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Title III funds are being used to provide supplemental language instruction and support to our four-level proficiency ELL students in grades 6-8. We serve a total of 25 English Language Learners:2- entering, 2 emerging, 10 - expanding and 11 transitioning . After analyzing student data from the NYSITELL , NYSESLAT,Benchmark Assessment for ELLs , as well as the English Language Arts standardized test results, it has been determined that our ELL students need additional support in all four modalities of English Language Acquisition: reading, writing, listening and speaking in order to meet the requirements of standardized tests, and career and college readiness. Data analysis reveals that the weakest part of the tests are multiple choice questions , grammar, academic vocabulary, and writing short and long responses. The most of entering and emerging students need additional stand -alone language instruction, especially students with different from Indo-European family of languages home language, i.e. Arabic students. We will use Imagine Learning and Language Power to strengthen studenrts' language acquisition in reading , writing, speaking, and listening. Translanguaging is common method used for ELL's higher awareness and inclusion both during the instructional time and in after school program. Our Ebbets Field Middle School ELL after school program will provide direct instruction in intensive literacy and academic vocabulary for entering and emerging students. Imagine learning is an on-line program designed for catering all levels of ELLs with home language support and individual path of English Language Acquisition. It also covers all 4 modalities of language learning, e.g. speaking, listening, reading ,and writing.(added:)End of year test showed considerable growth in both general literacy and vocabulary. The instructional focus is on improving the phonological awareness, knowledge of phonics, high-frequency words, vocabulary, grammar, and text comprehension by all levels of ELLs.Language Power empowers language learners to build English Language proficiency with highly-differentiated and rich instructional resources, which develops the four language demand of the reading, writing, listening, and speaking. Students invited to the program are from the following subgroups: newcomers, developing ELLs, long term ELLs, ELLs with disabilities and SIFE students. Students will meet four times a week on Tuesdays , Wednesdays, Thursdays, and Fridays from 2:40 pm to 3:55pm (November 2018 - Jun 2019). ELLs will also be supported in Saturday Academy which will meet beginning in January 2019 from 9am - 11:30 am. The instructional focus of the program will be on improving the phonological awareness, knowledge of phonics, high frequency words, vocabulary, grammar, and text comprehension by entering and emerging ELL students. In addition, the program will support all ELL students in making claim(s) supported logical reasoning and relevant evidence, using accurate, credible sources and demonstrating an understanding of the topic or text aligned with the level of students' English Language Acquisition (ELA). The instruction provided is embedded within the context and content of non-fiction science and social studies texts as well as literary texts and tasks in ELA. The ELLs will increase understanding of English language structure through immersion into listening, shared read-aloud texts,and performing different communicative tasks. In accordance with their zone of proximal development (ZPD), they will learn to support claim(s) with logical 2018-19 CEP-RISE 108  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information reasoning and relevant evidence, use accurate academic vocabulary, cite credible sources of information, and demonstrate deep understanding of the informational or literary text by close ( guided and independent) reading. In addition to using the Imagine Learning online program another educational software, Flocabulary will be used in the classroom. Flocabulary provides a wide variety of instructional opportunities to teach academic vocabulry, close reading, and improve writing skills in a student- friendly context.The program incorporates opportunities for students to make text to text , text to self and text to world connections in its weekly news reviews; to support claim(s) with logical reasoning and relevant evidence, to use accurate, credible sources, and demonstrate deep understanding of the topic / text. The priority in using the Title III funds is to provide additional linguistic training to support and develop students' skills in comprehension, analysis, comparing and contrasting, and in general day to day conversation and free expression both in an educational context and in academic writing aligned with common core learning standards in core subjects. It adds to improved teaching and learning in the core subjects such as English Language Arts, Science, Math, and Social Studies. Entering and emerging ELLs will be monitored by specialist 4 times a week, with the instruction based on the above on -line programs. Communicative tasks will include lots of real life world problems to broaden the students' knowledge of real world, English academic and colloquial vocabulary and its usage in their own oral and written speech. The certified teacher will monitor and conduct individual conferencing of results with program participants, from September 2018 to June 2019. ELL students will visit Metropolitan Museum of Arts, Natural History Museum, )Brooklyn Museum of Arts,Whitney and Bric Museums as a part of recognition of multiculturalism and appreciation of different cultures, in order to acquire and widen their background knowledge of ELA content with the Expeditionary Learning and Teachers College Writing Curriculum. The supplemental materials such as ReadyNY and Coach workbooks along with other test prep workbooks will be used distinct from those used for after school instruction.All records about students' attendance and progress will be regularly maintained. Parents will be notified in preferred language from Home Language Survey by using on-line translator software and live interpreters if needed. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: At Ebbets Field Middle School 352 the ENL teacher designated to the after school Program conducts test prep strategies for all ELL students. Teacher receives professional development in learning activities, cutting-edge learning techniques, and multiple strategies to improve the performance of the targeted immigrant students. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 109  Part C: Professional Development Professional Development for the teachers taking part in this after school Program will be conducted as follows: 1. Team Planning Session: The ENL/GE teachers in the program will meet and plan lessons for the ELL after school Program. These planning sessions will take place(changed) from September 2018 through June 2019. 2. All Day PD Session for the ENL/GE teachers: Topic: Advanced Literacy and Using Translanguaging in the classroom. :Cooperative Strategic Reading; Facilitators - Falcon (ENL) and FSC ENL Coach will turnkey these PD sessions to the remaining general education teachers in the school on a monthly basis. The professional developments are intended to deepen teacher knowledge in ENL methodologies and content area curriculum, Advanced Literacy Program and skills, to provide teachers with additional strategies to be used with ELLs. All in all, ongoing professional development for both teachers working in the Title III program and general education teachers working with ELLs will positively impact the progress of ENL learners. 3. ENL teacher and the teacher designated to the after school program will visit NYS TESOL 48th Annual Conference.Experience: The Heart of Teaching and Learning March 21 -23, 2019, Albany, NY 4.In addition, Professional Learning will be provided on Monday afternoon sessions from 2:40pm to 3:55pm. Our ENL and GE teacher will be a part of a number of webinars provided by Imagine Learning to support the use and implementing the program, reviewing the program's data and creating next steps for student improvement. The ENL teacher will also receive PL around using and implementing the Flocabulary program to build students' vocabulary beginning in October 2018. Both Programs provide support as needed via webinars and weekly support from administration. 5.General education teachers will have PD sessions focused on ELL support in their classrooms throughout the year from the FSC ELL Coach to meet the requirements under CR Part 154. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: For ELLs' parents workshops are scheduled (November 2018 - May 2019), where support will be provided in the use of technology supported by a teacher and outside providers bi-monthly.The data analysis shows that the most of ELLs' parents are not great users of computers and may not have access to technology. Nowadays, when they can easily follow their students' progress on line, it is essential to improve their computer skills. This will solidify and strengthen teacher- parent relationships by providing support and improvement in student achievement. Parents will learn how to read DOE documents online, use Skedula to track their children's success, access various online programs that provide them access to student data and provide responses to the teachers online through sKedula. Parents will be provided access and will be supported in 2018-19 CEP-RISE 110  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities using google translate.com to support with translation. Parents will be encouraged to visit the Ebbets Field Middle School Extended Learning Program to observe their students and monitor student progress. Parents will also be encouraged to participate in PA meeting monthly with the support of language translators so they have active input in school wide decisions that impact their children. During the first week of school and throughout the school year for new admits, parents are surveyed for their translation and interpretation needs. Communication with parents is based on response to the survey. Our staff who are fluent in native languages spoken by our parents assist with interpretation and written translations when needed. If necessary, the phone interpretation services provided by the DOE translation unit are being utilized.The records of this program will be regularly maintained by keeping agendas,attendance sheets and numerous home-language invitations to parents in a special cumulative folder and on-line in Google docs, too. Throughout the year, our parent coordinator will offer workshops that invite parents of ENL students to participate. Every effort is made to provide translation services at the parent meetings. Our workshops for parents often take place during school, after school and sometimes on Saturdays. Refreshments are often provided during such meetings. Title III Parent Involvement programs encourage parents to learn together with their children through participation in an ELL after school Program. They will also have an opportunity to simulate a walk through of a draft of the ELA and Math exam during a workshop. Parents will also be provided with bilingual dictionaries ( home language/English), and training on how to use them to assist their child with homework and projects. Workshops will be held by both outside vendors and teachers and our ENL teacher and other teachers around language acquisition, curriculum support, learning strategies to support student learning and civics education for new immigrants to support them with the knowledge of their rights, DACA, access to legal services, navigating the school system,civic reasoning in a social media environment, etc. Students will have a celebration where parents will be invited, and their children will receive certificates to celebrate their work and success in the after school program and will have the opportunity to share what they have learned. Apart from workshops, we are intended to organize a trip for ELL students and their parents to visit higher educational institutions ( e.g. Princeton or Yale) designed to inspire the parents to become active participants in their children education. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem $7,833.00 ($5,625.00 $2,208.00 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Imagine Learning Program 1 Teacher x 1.5 hour x 3 days = 4.5 hrs 4.5hrs x 25 weeks = 112.5 hrs. 112.5 hrs x $50.00 = $5, 625.00 Saturday school for parents 2018-19 CEP-RISE 111  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. $852.00 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Every Saturday 1.5hrs x32weeks = 48 hours $46 X 48 hours = $2,208.00 NYSABA Conference 1 Teachers x $485 per teacher for the conference = $485 ($367 Remaining: $ 260 to travel & one-night hotel; Language Power Program $3,441.00 Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL $240.00 (Additional $133 added from Professional Salary Balance and $107.00 from PD) $12,366.00 Metro Cards for parents $133.00 Refreshments for parents $ 107.00 12,366.00 2018-19 CEP-RISE 112  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 17 School Name Ebbets Field Middle School Borough Brooklyn School Number 352 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Jeanne Rowe Coach Celeste Walker ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Gloria Falcon Teacher/Subject Area Andrea Orr Teacher/Subject Area Anita Ighodaro Related-Service Provider Superintendent Clarence Ellis Assistant Principal Veronica Mullen-Morris Coach School Counselor Jacqueline Allen-Cooper Parent Saronda Gil Baptise Parent Coordinator Ersell Mellis Field Support Center Staff Member Marling Moranta Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 134 2018-19 CEP-RISE 113 Total number of ELLs 31 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 23.13%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 K 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 3 0 4 0 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Literacy assessments are performed by ENL and ELA teachers based on the teacher-created assessments.That includes ELA running records, weekly reading logs, daily journal entries, i-ready checks ELA and Math Imagine Learning, ,myON.com reading resources are,also,used with a system of formative assessments in reading. We work in conjunction with the ELA teachers, monitoring the progress and assessing the needs of ELL students during constant both formal and informal assessments.We, also, use I-ready on-line diagnostic assessment tool both in ELA and Math. The program has excellent formative assessment tools,e.g. average time on task, pass rate of completed lessons,time on task updated nightly.Students take part in a contest for the first place in weekly amount of passing rate in either Math or ELA. Both ENL and content teachers use a weekly review for instructional progress for both ELLs and not ELLs. The summary has data on phonological awareness, high-frequency words, vocabulary and overall comprehension which helps to review each student's progress in each domain. Formative assessment of the kind is specifically relevant to ELLs who start from the very beginning in English Language Acquisition.. Ells are very active in the program and very often lead the lists of winners. TCRWP is a curriculum-embedded assessment in our school 2018-19 CEP-RISE 114  which helps to use the formative assessments to plan differentiated, explicit instruction for each student assessed.Teachers create assessments aligned with lesson learning target for every lesson in the form of exit slips, which allows to plan the next step of instruction in accordance with students' progress data. Based on 2018-2019 school year assessment data, 80% of newcomers in ENL program have low literacy skills in their home language, which makes instruction very challenging for starters, e.g. students with Fulani as their home language can neither read nor write in home language.Arabic students always lag behind due to the great difference in the language groups between English and their home language. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? All the above-mentioned on-going assessments are structured in accordance with the course they assess. Students have i-ready weekly for two periods,the assessment is generated by the software catering to difference in the current level of student.MyOn program is embedded into curriculum for one period each day. Teachers give mini-lesson on what to pay attention to while reading and ,then, students are reading in the system which assesses their level automatically. Teachers project the comparative results of each student's success on the smart board. Informally, all teachers keep running record of conference logs weekly for each student. Every lesson is planned with journal entry task at the beginning and exit slip at the end of the lesson.This is a valuable source of information for further planning and instruction.Weekly, ELA teachers deliver the lessons on Teachers College Reading and Writing Project. Teacher -created assessments for this program are part of the guided instruction for all school population including ELLs within the Response to Intervention framework. Formative assessments for entering ELLs incorporate a lot of translanguaging with i-pads using Google translate, on-line bilingual dictionaries during each integrated push-in lesson.Stand-alone ENL lessons,on the contrary,are structured with minimal translations into home languages.Work on the mechanics of English is assessed formally in the course of each lesson. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Adequate Yearly Progress is evaluated by working out a data inventory at the beginning of the school year, which serves as a comprehensive list of the student assessment data collected in Ebbets Field Middle School throughout the school year. The assessment calendar gives the clear idea of content areas, dates of collection and students assessed. The latter are definitely not the entering and emerging Ells.We use common planning to adept Expeditionary Learning pre-unit, end of module,mid-unit, and end of unit assessments to Ells' needs depending on the level of SLA they are on.There is also especially designed test for the same grade bands as as NYSESLAT. in Listening ,Reading & Writing and Speaking to be taken in the fall and spring of the school year as a supplemental component of the Periodic Assessment portfolio. By regularly administering MOSL in ELA , science, social studies and Math; Baseline/Benchmark Ready Assessments, IReady assessments starting with diagnostic and constantly monitoring progress and analyzing data from EDAT for at-risk Ell students, we identify baseline, progress and areas of need for each student who is Ell. All staff is provided with data from EDAT to drive instruction,implement interventions for ELLs.The end of year diagnostic assessment in ELA i-ready placed all Ells into different levels which demonstrate the overall achievement of each Ell in analytical reading and comprehension of informational texts while MyOn program gives data on literary texts. The success of our programs for ELLs will be greater as we have an opportunity to provide the complete beginners with specially designed stand-alone language instruction course based on an efficient on-line program for beginners .As recent research indicates, students who received focused second-language instruction made more than five times gains of students who did not.(American Educator,summer 2013,p.17). Also, we provide differentiated instruction for Entering and Emerging students during the pull-out time. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the summative data has been gathered, different levels of meetings devoted to analyzing the results and generate the graphs of students' success are being held.Common planning meetings by content area (90 minutes once a week) are followed by Instructional Cabinet meeting (90 minutes once a week) which works out next instructional steps for the whole school across curriculum. Weak points are found, the learning problem formulated and the action plan worked out for the next period of instructions.Cross-curriculum meetings to acquire clearer understanding of next steps in instructional practices are held after the content areas have completed the analysis of data, some common tendencies are identified. To better apply the 2018-19 CEP-RISE 115  findings, teachers do rows of inter-visitations, gathering low inference notes on teaching practices. Analysing and re-analysing both summative data results and teaching practices helps the team come up with un-biased decisions to address further interventions.ELLs are always in the center of attention across curriculum as the most struggling part of the school's population 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Early intervention through a tiered system of instructional support has been steadily used as an addition to the standard core curriculum in Ebbets Field Middle School. Most of the content area teachers plan their lessons with differentiation for three tiers in both instruction, individual work and assessment in their daily lesson plans, where to Tier #1 refer students with demonstrated proficiency in comprehension based on previous classroom assessment. ELLs, IEP and readers struggling with comprehension skills belong to the second tier. Tier 3 comprises some of the new coming ELLs and IEP reluctant readers struggling with decoding as well as comprehension deficits, they work with ENL or special education teachers.It should be noted that identifying the tier is a flexible process based on constant analysis of teacher-created assessments precise and tailored to the discrete skills students may need to further develop. Such research based instruction that is linguistically and culturally appropriate for ELLs not only guides daily teaching but ,also, provides more instructionally relevant data about ELLs. The teachers constantly use screeners and formative assessments to identify students who need a more focused instruction with certain literacy skills. Those are used as guidance for designing RTI instruction. The additional support services are based on the Data Wise research of both the Instructional Cabinet and Common Planning teams of a learner-centered problem,which is related to the problem of practice and informs the action plan.All teachers use The English Language Learning Progressions for planning each lesson with ELLs. We provide ELLs with the additional support based on English and HL literacy, socio-emotional support needed and samples of students works.RtI is implemented by the team of teachers from every grade level..All teachers widely use translanguaging on the beginning stages of English Language Acquisition.Special education teachers take an active role in the RtI process in our school.We use in class tutors, small groups instructions, my personal Math trainer to help the ELLs struggling with academic learning, and restorative practices,peer group connection, community school initiative to address cultural and socio-emotional problems of ELLs. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The main outcome assessments for ELLs are NYSESLAT and I-ready end- of the -year diagnostic test.The data patterns are most regularly repeated and reveal the same tendencies: NYSITELL is administered to 95% of complete beginners in ENL. Each newcomer will complete the NYSITELL during the identification process. The areas in the NYSESLAT that students show the greatest weakness in are the Reading and Writing sections. Scores in Listening and Speaking are relatively higher. 95 % of newcomers come with no knowledge of English whatsoever. 5% studied English before but still show the level of Entering in the NYSITELL. Students score better on the exams in science and Math given in their native language. We provide continuous assessment using a variety of instruments including Scholastic Reading Inventory, i-ready software, and Get Ready for the NYSESLAT. The ultimate goal is that of moving all students to English proficiency while strengthening and developing their skills in all four modalities. The native language is used on the Entering and Emerging levels the most extensively especially for providing integrated ENL. Stand-alone pull-outs are mostly delivered in English with the help of visuals and videos. EDAT gives a lot of different data to inform the instruction for ELLs.The tool helps to analyse the data from NYSESLAT by levels, HL,different modalities; ELA and Maths growth percentile.It also helps to create at-risk level for each student considering different at-risk factors,e.g.attendance, progress in NYSESLAT ,etc. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 116  7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? All the data for ELLs are analyzed and re-analyzed by all teachers working with ELLs at weekly Common planning sessions of teams organised by content areas; also, by members of Instructional Cabinet team used in their Data Wise inquiry, and during the weekly professional developments of the whole staff. All teacher share important materials on Google docs and are aware of all the main documents needed to make adjustments to their individual programs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Ebbets Field Middle School 352 currently provides instruction to English language learners through a Free Standing ENL push-ins and pull-outs program for the entering , emerging, transitioning and expanding students. We also provide commanding students 90 minutes per week with ENL specialist support for two years after they had tested out. These organizational models ensure that the mandated number of instructional minutes are provided according to proficiency levels (360 minutes of ENL services for entering and emerging students, and 180 minutes of ENL service for transitioning and expanding students). The mandated number of instructional minutes for integrated ENL are being provided by the ENL teacher co-teaching with the content area instructor. ELLs with mixed proficiency levels receive instruction in content areas (mostly ELA) by two teachers working in ensemble. ELLs in such classes have heterogeneous level of the English Language Acquisition . In all such classes ENL strategies, differentiated instructions and the workshop models, based on cutting edge research in language teaching, are constantly being implemented to help students improve their achievements. We have 4 proficiency levels of ELLs as determined by the testing, Students are flexibly grouped within their grade with native speakers and in both homogeneous and heterogeneous groups depending on the strategy applied at the moment Push-In program is implemented to serve integrated ENL by co-teaching various subjects such as ELA ( for entering, emerging, and transitioning ELLs), Math, Science and Social Studies for expanding and commanding ELLs. A Pull -out program is implemented for serving the assigned minutes of standalone ENL to entering and emerging students.Mandated 180 minutes of freestanding English for entering students and minimum 90 minutes for emerging ELLs are served by ENL specialist during the four times a week periods pull-outs in an ungraded group,e.g. for pull-outs we group beginners together homogeneously, irrespective of the grade, for maximum effectiveness of teaching instructions. We program to ensure that all ELLs and former ELLs who tested out within the past 2 years have been scheduled for a minimum of ENL as per SED's CR Part 154 mandates. Specially assigned person periodically reviews all ELLs' and former ELLs' STARS programming data to ensure full compliance with SED regulations. Small group instructions are delivered to some of the entering students from Tier 3 once a week to provide additional support. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not applicable. c. DL program. If applicable. Not applicable. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 117  For our Freestanding ENL program the mandated number of instructional minutes are provided by both push-ins and pull-outs. Students receive required minutes of instruction (entering - 360 minutes per week, emerging - 360 minutes per week, and transitioning and expanding - 180 minutes per week). Commanding students( former ELLs) are still being served 90 minutes of integrated ENL in ELA or other Content areas. Students are grouped heterogeneously as well as homogeneously for classroom activities involving language development, particularly learning activities that involve group work and accountable talk with peers. The native language support is provided via dictionaries, translanguaging, on-line dictionaries, Google translate software, and partnering students with the same home language. The content area classes are taught by Math teacher who is certified in her subject as well as ENL, she holds both a common branch license and TESOLcertification. Push-in program is implemented to serve integrated ENL by co-teaching various subjects such as ELA ( for entering, emerging, and transitioning ELLs), Math, Science and Social Studies for expanding and commanding ELLs. A Pull -out program is implemented for serving the assigned minutes of standalone ENL to entering and emerging students. The instruction is differentiated for two levels respectively.Mandated 180 minutes of standalone English for entering students and minimum 90 minutes for emerging ELLs are served by ENL specialist during the four times a week periods pull-outs. For pull-outs we group beginners together homogeneously for maximum effectiveness of teaching instructions. We program to ensure that all ELLs and former ELLs who tested out within the past 2 years have been scheduled for a minimum of ENL service as per SED's CR Part 154 mandates.Specially assigned person periodically reviews all ELLs' and former ELLs' STARS programming data to ensure full compliance with SED regulations. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL teachers continue to engage in collaborative activities; they also share best practices with content area teachers during specially assigned common planning periods and during professional development time. The ENL as well as the content area teachers are constantly exposed to the results of the cutting -edge research in second language acquisition; share instructional materials accommodating the newest trends in methods of language teaching. They design common assessments, analyze results, consider and implement “next steps" that can help them meet the needs of all students during bridge to practice parts of common planning meetings,which are held regularly. Also, more elements of technology are expected in both the ENL and the content area classrooms. All teachers involved with the ELLs are made aware during faculty conferences and common preparation meetings of the educational challenges the ELLs face across content areas. In its turn, school leadership provides them with instructional support and ideas on differentiation of instruction aligned with the new Common Core Standards.Weekly Instructional cabinet meetings help to analyse data and build the modifications to the schedule based on the results in accordance with Data Wise process: the team defines the problem of practice, works out the action plan and assesses the progress after its implementation. Based on data, academic intervention is provided with individualized remedial instruction in small groups as well as in after school program for students who need extra support ( revealed also by EDAT) like the SIFE, long term ELLs, newcomers and those alternatively placed in Special Education. The content-area teachers differentiate based on the student levels of proficiency and needs while also implementing ENL strategies and scaffolds. Each student is continually assessed using a variety of instruments including, Scholastic Reading Inventory and Get Ready for the NYSESLAT. We have been using a computer assisted instructional program called IReady and Imagine Learning that are mandated diagnostic program, tailored to meet the specific instructional needs of each student's unique learning needs because, while students gain proficiency, their linguistic needs change accordingly. The ultimate goal is to increase students' English proficiency while strengthening and developing their skills in native language when possible.Both ENL and content area teachers use translanguaging (Google translate) as a strategy for beginners to integrate the core content along with Flocabulary, it is reflected in every lesson plan.To make the content comprehensible they also incorporate recommendations from the English language Learning Progressions while planning as a valuable resource for both mainstream and ESOL teachers. Each lesson plan contains not only Learning Objective aligned with the CCLS but also a language objective to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? The Spanish Language Assessment Battery(LAB) is used as a diagnostic tool of native language proficiency in Spanish (administered by licensed teacher of Spanish). For other home languages, we follow the multilingual literacy SIFE screener (MLS) at least three days before first test administration.By viewing the MLS Literacy Skills and Ability Report we 2018-19 CEP-RISE 118  ensure that the new coming ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home language during the identification process. Though we do not have bilingual programs in our school, translanguaging is the most recommended method of maintaining students home language level. Ebbets Field Middle Schools is deeply committed to the notion that all services to ELLs must be structured to support, enhance and, if possible, preserve the native language, and unique students culture,while building and developing English as the target language. To accomplish this, we sponsor cultural and linguistic activities where students have an opportunity to use, teach and develop their native languages. At the start of the program, entering students may answer in home language and google translate their answers into English, by the end of the year the usage of translanguaging diminishes in accordance with students level of English language acquisition. All students at Ebbets Field Middle School including ENL follow a state mandated curriculum and pacing calendar identical to that of the monolingual, replete with Impact Mathematics and Chancellor’s libraries. All ELLs also have access to multicultural libraries in each classroom that were selected to meet the cultural interests of students from various ethnic groups. These libraries were purchased through Attanasio Associates - a leader in bilingual curriculum products. These books were grouped and selected as they reinforce linguistic and cultural themes specific to the students’ native lands, cultures and traditions. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status : We differentiate instruction in a variety of ways to support our ELLs. To begin with, we implement the RtI Model for ELLs' Academic Success, as well as the English Language Learning Progressions aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards. a. For our SIFE students( Ells who attended schools in the US for less than 12 months are 2 or more years below grade level literacy in HL) we stress explicit instruction in reading across the subject area with an emphasis on vocabulary reading and read-aloud in each lesson. Frayer Model is used school-wide for teaching different tiers of vocabulary, depending on students literacy level. These strategies are implemented within the ENL classrooms as well as in the content areas. SIFE students daily receive scaffolded instructions related to the lessons and reading comprehension; numerous graphic organizers are used for paragraph and essay composition writing process. VTS is a widely-used strategy for building prior knowledge and teaching students to make text to self, text to text and text to world connections. Academic intervention is also in place with individualized remedial instruction in small groups to better prepare SIFE for the NYSESLAT as well as the ELA exam.Students identified as SIFE students receive support in Math and ELA through the Imagine Learning Program and are supported with , differentiated instruction to improve their reading and math skills. The SIFE status is removed after NYSESLAT results indicate the transitioning level of English Language Acquisition. b. For the ENL newcomers(ELLs in the program for less than 3 years) we provide a host of instructional and culturally related services. We are helping our newcomers to adjust to new way of life and the new school as well as lessons geared towards learning more about the United States culture.Each newcomer has a buddy in and out of the classroom who came from the same culture and can help them to integrate into the new system. Also, more reading and writing is infused in the content area classes and ENL teachers (through pull-out program) include more instruction in grammar, discourse, phonemic, phonological, and semantic awareness. Across the curriculum, all teachers use translanguaging as a strategy to include the newcomers into the classroom activities. In ELA classroom,newcomers have a duplicate of the book designed by the curriculum in their home language if applicable, and/or graphic novels to integrate them more fully into the ELA core curriculum. Arabic students are given handouts with the on-line Arabic version of the novels if possible. MyOn is an on-line reading program which together with i-ready helps to give the adequate level of tasks for the beginners. c. With the ELLs that are identified as developing(4 to 6 years of continuous enrolment in ENL program), most of whom range between transitioning and expanding level of proficiency, ENL and content area teachers provide level-aligned scaffolds widening the vocabulary to tier 2 and tier 3. These students become active partners in Peer Group Connections program. They are involved in the process of instruction helping the beginning to study English peers. They lead in restorative circles with their classmates, help them with academic vocabulary and text to life connections, assist their peer ELLs in project learning and cultural accommodation.Being involved in helping their peers, they develop oral communication skills, utilize an 2018-19 CEP-RISE 119  academic vocabulary, continue to acquire English. They also use I-ready and MyOn on-line programs to develop their language skills. Both ENL and content area teachers design specific scaffolds based on individual learning style and learning objective. model and teach basic reading skills for fluency, close reading for deeper comprehension of both informational and literary texts, intermediate and advanced grammar and writing skills lessons, and ENL teachers are putting more emphasis on making them read aloud with peers in groups, more advanced grammar and vocabulary. Those students and discussing and formulating their questions using better phonemic awareness and pronunciation skills.All these activities tend to develop academic language, advance grammar. d. Our plan for the Long Term English Language Learners( who received ENL instructions for 7 or more years) includes the strategies listed above. e. This school year , we have 4 students who are former ELLs. For those students that have passed the NYSESLAT and have achieved proficiency in the English language and have been transitioned into mainstream classes in the last two years, we still provide modifications allowed to them when they take their state tests. Commanding ELLs, who have recently gotten proficiency , are supported by both ENL teachers and content area pedagogues.We have 4 commanding students this year. These students become active members in our Student Government. They are involved in the process of instruction helping the beginning to study English peers. They lead in restorative circles with their classmates, help them with academic vocabulary and text to life connections, assist their peer ELLs in project learning and cultural accommodation. Being involved in helping their peers, they develop oral communication skills, utilize an academic vocabulary, continue to acquire EnglishThey frequently come to ENL classrooms for additional materials in reading and listening based on their level of second language acquisition. When planning for a strong ELL team, it is important to consider the diverse expertise that different teachers bring to our school. We have many teachers with multiple credentials, licenses, and extensions who offer the school community additional flexibility to meet student needs. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? For our ELLs with special needs we provide services where instruction in all four modalities is aligned with their specific Instructional Educational Plan, ENL New York State standards as well as the Common Core Standards. We will continue to develop students' active listening, reading, and writing skills through differentiation of instruction and formative and summative assessments throughout the year. On the regular basis, teachers serving ELLs use instructional strategies from RtI Guide to Teachers of ELLs. Numerous instructional strategies for strong core instructions as well as serving the struggling ELLs are being used.Moreover, for LEP students who have been designated at risk on EDAT we look at which of the modalities they scored the lowest and we provide interventions aligned with the modality either during the push-in or pulling them out in a small group/individually. ENL teacher push-ins to this classrooms to provide scaffolds based on students previous class exit tickets, conferencing, and formative assessments during the lesson. Individual intervention is often used. ELLs who have been provided high-quality instruction and research-based interventions through an RtI framework and still have trouble demonstrating adequate progress in targeted skills and competencies may be referred to special education. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? In our school, we have two 8 graders who are ELL-SWDs. One of them is commanding and the other one- expanding.We also have one commanding SWD in 7 grade. All of them are integrated into a mainstream (ICT) classroom to be in the least restrictive environment. In Integrated co-teaching classroom, the curriculum for these ELL-SWDs is the same as to mainstream students, but the scaffolds provided are based on their IEP goals, thoroughly studied by ENL instructor previously and discussed with common core teacher during common planning periods. While ENL instruction for ELLs are mostly push-ins, the mode of instructing this category of students may be pull-outs depending on the formative assessments and conferencing 2018-19 CEP-RISE 120  results. During the pull-outs, the instructional groups are small and the teacher can use such scheduling flexibility to enable every student in a group to constantly stay in his individual zone of proximal development gradually moving to the clearly formulated short-term goals with an overall tendency of attainment of proficiency in English. All the support services provided are aligned to the intervention plans, which we are providing to the students (Academic Intervention Services). The teachers use RtI resources for ELL educators on the DELSS' website. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Based on the analysis of data from multiple sources, we are looking at a variety of different formative and benchmark assessments results to determine which ELLs need the most support in different content areas, including English and Math. Weekly Instructional Cabinet comes up with the decisions of modifying instruction based on triangulated analyses of data. We are building the targeted intervention based on students' strengths working with the material which needs revision and re-teaching in an altered way. We specifically target those that are struggling and provide intervention. We provide small groups intervention services in the English language, frequent group instructions in heterogeneous groups where more advanced peers can help their struggling classmates use home language support if needed. We have been using a computer assisted instructional program called IReady that is a mandated diagnostic program, tailored to meet the specific instructional needs of each student's unique learning needs because, while students gain proficiency, their linguistic needs change accordingly. The ultimate goal is to increase students' English proficiency while strengthening and developing their skills in native language when possible.Both ENL and content area teachers use translanguaging (Google translate) as a strategy for beginners to integrate the core content, it is reflected in every lesson plan.To make the content comprehensible they also incorporate recommendations from the English language Learning Progressions while planning as a valuable resource for both mainstream and ESOL teachers. Each lesson plan contains not only Learning Objective aligned with the CCLS but also a language objective to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? This is the first year after several years of break that we started using official pull-outs to serve the entering and emerging students for standalone English instruction. We use Side by Side- third edition (Pearson Longman) for these instructions.We also continue using i-ready and MyOn online software to improve students reading skills, glossaries with specific academic vocabulary in content areas will be actively used for instruction aligned with Common Core Learning Standards. We plan to buy Babylon-software.com(Term Translations in 77 languages Unlimited Full Text Translation Office Documents Translated in their Original Format Human Voice Text to Speech) for our ELL students to replace Google Translate. We want to buy an on-line course for entering students aligned to the cutting -edge research in English Language Acquisition.If funding permits, we will be using ELLIS - another computer assisted program. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are offered equal access to all school programs aligned with their new language (English) acquisition level. Our school offers summer programs that serve as a bridge to the new academic school year in regards to ELL students. Community School Partnerships programs and services are in progress this school year. New York Edge - after-school program has both recreational and tutoring activities. Sports and Arts in School Foundation, Center for Supportive Schools(CSS), Peer Groups Connection (PGC), Peer Mentoring Program when 8th grade peer mentors to the incoming 6th graders- ELLs are the most active members of the teams. New York Edge work collaboratively with the staff at EFMS to provide small group tutoring in Mathematics for 26 students and ELA to 27 students. On the 12th of June students had an award ceremony. Among higher achievers were many ELLs. In this way, honoring our ELLs helps to activate their equal access to numerous school program. ELLs visit Brooklyn Museum of Arts, Whitey Museum, Metropolitan Museum and Brooklyn Botanical Garden on a 2018-19 CEP-RISE 121  regular basis, being this way exposed to experiences which help them to build prior knowledge to use in academic process. Every week Kaplan tutoring team comes to get students prepared for specialized high schools' entrance exams. Students are put in the program on an equal basis depending on their scores and personal interest. College readiness for Brooklyn Tech,Bronx High School of Science, etc. is a cornerstone of the program. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Each ELL student is continually trained by Scholastic Book Club and Get Ready for the NYSESLAT. We are using free software which are available both in the ENL classrooms, and while co -teaching in content area classrooms to increase students' language proficiency. There are: esl-lab.com; many things.org; grammar-quizzes.com; rong-chang.com; readworks.org available on line to improve students' reading, writing, speaking, and listening skills. All ELLs have i-pads to complete translanguaging and use the on-line programs. I-ready is a mandatory program both in ELA and Math. Engage NY curriculum which we use in ELA has modifications aligned with Common Core State Standards catering for ELLs, in accordance with the English Language Learning Progression. Each students has a workbook and a text ,literary translation into their HL, if available. I-ready is a computer assisted instructional program that is diagnostic and tailored to meet the specific instructional needs of each student's unique learning needs. MyOn Reading on-line program is a great support for ELLs as they can train both their reading and comprehension skills. It is assigned to all students at school. and gives students an opportunity to choose from thousands of books which are recorded, too. As students gain proficiency, their linguistic instructional ratios change accordingly. This program gives us an additional source of data for analysis. The ultimate goal is that of moving all students to English proficiency while strengthening and developing their reading, listening,writing, and speaking skills using academic vocabulary related to the grade level. Saturday Academy started January 2018 through May 2019 from 9am - 11:30am.The Academy targeted 50 students(65% ELLs) from grades 6,7 & 8. This program was designed to increase student performance in Math and ELA. Students received core subjects from 3 licensed teachers who are being trained in ENL approaches and strategies in the course of workshops organized for teachers working with ENL students by the group of ENL certified teachers. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In ENL, home language support is delivered by using translanguaging techniques (based on Google translate on-line program), on-line dictionaries, and by using bilingual dictionaries and textbooks both by ENL and content area teachers across curriculum. Starting at approximately high level of support for entering students, the usage of translanguaging decreases by the time they reach emerging level of New Language Acquisition and when ELLs enter transitioning and expanding levels the support is given by Thesauruses and English- English Dictionaries. Translanguaging is used according to students literacy in his home language and becomes problematic with Fulani or when students are SIFE. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. There are 27 ENL students at Ebbets Field Middle School.These students are being served through an ESL push-in/pull-out program. Students in grades 6, 7 & 8 receive at least four periods per week (Transitioning and expanding levels) and 8 periods (entering and emerging students). These students receive instruction in English with an emphasis on stand-alone ENL and integrated ENL either into ELA or other content areas which, of course, is determined by their individual levels of proficiency and the requirements of CR-Part 154.2. Social Studies and Math is taught to them by the licensed teacher, who holds ENL certification. ELLs are taught Science by a licensed Science teacher. We have certified ENL teachers who push in to provide the ENL instructional support. And during pull-outs, ENL instructor serves standalone ENL assigned minutes to entering and emergent students who comprise the main body (30 of 44) of all ELLs. All teachers incorporate the Common Core Standards to provide tiered instruction to students including ELLs. ENL teachers work in conjunction with the curriculum, employing such techniques as translanguaging, which means translating the materials into the student's home language, thorough academic vocabulary instructions based on Frayer model with additional resources such as glossaries, picture dictionaries, and i-pads. All materials are age appropriate and correspond to the grade level of the ELL students. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We share the building with two more schools but we do not share ENL resources. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 122  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We offer a Summer Academy program that serves as a bridge for ELL students enrolling in our school. PBIS (Positive Behavioral Intervention and Supports are delivered by specially assigned school staff together with all teachers.School counselors help to adept newcomers to new environment and make it friendly. We work in close conjunction with Translation and Interpretation Unit.Parent coordinator supports organising of parent- teacher conferences, translates the materials into students home languages,invites interpreters to help communicate meaningfully. All school-Produced critical documents are translated into main languages of ELLs. The connection between elementary and middle school staff is very important for student’s smooth transition from one level to the other. As a means of transitioning from elementary to middle school, the ESL teachers have visited the incoming ENL students to inform them of the expectations.ENL teachers from EFMS meet Jacky Robinson Elementary school ENL teachers to discuss students' readiness and documentation (newsletters,calendars, parent-teacher conferences announcements,after-school program information, letters from the principal). Additionally, we provide materials to take home such as glossaries and picture dictionaries, and bilingual language books for students to examine and study. We also recommend Starfall.com program to assist beginners. After school New York Edge program has subject based tutoring program organized in collaboration with the staff of the school provides tutoring in Math and ELA with a bulk of ELLs being served. School counselors assist struggling ELLs with transitioning into new environment,"at risk" counseling takes place both in attendance and academic progress; they also help families with community programs like "outreach" and"supportive services".Counselors also help ELLs with career and college goals planning. Parent coordinator works in cooperation with ENL teacher:sends information to ELLs' parents.organizes after school meetings with students' parents,provides information on different Pds for parents, and organizes them in our school.She works with Translation and Interpretation Unit to ensure the presence of interpreters during PTC and PA meetings and workshops , thus helping the newly enrolled ELLs to smoothly adapt to new environment. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional developments are held weekly, most of them deal with learning strategies and co-teaching models, helping to engage students into reading process, translanguaging and other scaffolds helping both ELLs and the whole student population to become independent learners. All members of the staff visit city-wide professional developments and conferences to turnkey the results to their colleagues on returning to school. The regulations of 50% of ENL related Professional Developments for ELLs' instructors and 15% for the rest of the staff are fulfilled. Some of the professional development are conducted during a common prep by the math and literacy coaches. Series of PDs was held at school for the city-wide participants. EFMS also housed a series of professional development for Teacher College. Half of the staff of our 2018-19 CEP-RISE 123  school worked with the lecturer being trained in different reading strategies. All teachers will receive 25% of professional development in teaching strategies and pedagogical approaches for English language learners. These approaches include: ENL strategies in the classroom, Advanced Literacy, translanguaging strategies,practical strategies for teaching vocabulary with fiction and non fiction texts. We organized Common Preparation Periods – weekly workshops for all the staff within and outside of the building.The outside professional developments content teachers turnkey to their colleagues at school. All workshops are aligned with the school's year-long instructional focus to expand upon the current path of study. Based on Data Wise Inquiry, we constantly improve our action plan, assess the results and develop the instruction in a spiral process of improvement. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The school-wide professional development agenda includes an ENL component. PDs include a whole-school exposure to pedagogy proved effective with second language learners and identify mechanisms through which these practices can be implemented in a heterogeneous and English dominant classroom setting. • Regularly delivered professional development sessions include strategies for increasing multicultural curriculum approaches in every content area across the curriculum. All teachers should know and understand the implications of culture on learning and social development and understand how to provide a classroom that can support new language learners in their new environment. • All teachers must be aware of opportunities for parents who are speakers of languages other than English to participate in adult education classes including ENL Basic Education and GED. All the teachers are aware of CR Part 154 regulations and new requirements to ENL programs and responsibilities of teachers serving ELLs. The Assistant Principals, paraprofessionals, guidance counselors, special education teachers, secretaries, and parent coordinator attend the CFN workshops provided throughout the school year. Professional Developments teaching language strategies based on cutting edge research are being presented at school,too. To meet the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2 15% of of total professional development time content area teachers who work with ELLs are trained to implement the new policies for ELLs in accordance with the above changes.The staff are provided access to high-quality ELL-specific professional learning opportunities: both district and school - based. ENL and common core teachers have been preparing and carrying out the seminars on scaffolding curriculum for ELLs, work with vocabularies and different techniques useful in delivering instruction for ELLs. ENL teachers will receive 50% of their professional development time aligned with the needs of ELLs. Approximately 6 professional development sessions are devoted to co-teaching in a mainstream classroom. Core teachers are being trained to use methods and strategies for teaching English as ENL, aligned with modern research in TESOL. and CCSS. Records of professional development time will be stored in agendas and attendance registration documentation, provided by the principal and by individual teachers for their own records.. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? At the beginning of the year, school parent coordinator sends newsletters, parent notices, student and family handbooks, discipline codes, and other items from central office in the languages preferred by parents of the students. We are blessed by 2018-19 CEP-RISE 124  having many multilingual staff members. Currently, our staff speaks and can translate into Spanish, Haitian Creole, Arabic, and French. Based on this, we use our in-house staff for most translation and interpretation tasks. We seek the assistance with the languages which we have no expertise with outside the building cooperating with Translation and Interpretation Unit. Phone call interpretations and/or written translations as needed are used on the regular basis. In addition, for group assemblies, workshops and PA Meetings and such, we hire live interpreters. Parents are encouraged to attend workshops provided by outside organizations during the PA and those provided by the District Office. The parent coordinator and guidance counselors survey parents during conferences and PA meetings to identify their needs and concerns. In Ebbets Field Middle School there are parent orientation meetings which are scheduled on regular basis. At these meetings parents of the current ELLs, new transitional ELLs from the elementary school, and recent arrivals have an opportunity to meet the teachers and discuss their academic needs and concerns.Parents also have an opportunity to talk to each other and propose their view of the existing problems.They fill in different surveys in their home language. In this way we evaluate the needs of the parents. All the originals of such orientation meetings with parents signatures are kept in cumulative folders for ELLs documentation and copies are also maintained in the school files. In partnership with New York Edge, parent workshops are held to reflect parent needs. We identify parent leadership through our SLT Team is who work collaboratively with members on the SLT and PA to improve parent involvement and participation. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents of ELL students meet in groups to address their concerns and to update them on their children's second language acquisition success. Parents are given folders with information on the school's plan of instructions for their newly enrolled children at EFMS. If there are urgent concerns that need to be addressed, meetings with parents are scheduled and held.We also plan and hold monthly award ceremonies for the best students.We also hold cultural events such international talent shows and projects that involve parents and families. The school will permanently post Translation Notices as outlined in the Chancellor’s Regulations. These signs will be posted in all the linguistic groups reflected in our school community. Students parents have monthly restorative Circles where they discuss urgent problems and try to come up with tackling them. ENL teachers meet with ELLs parents individually at least once during the school year to discuss the success and problems to be addressed. Family nights for all students are organized by New York Edge in cooperation with Community school partnerships programs and services. PBIS consultants help to establish and sustain the PBIS framework where emphasis is given to the compact of implementing PBIS on the social,emotional and academic outcomes for both students and parents of ELLs in the school community in particular. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2018-19 CEP-RISE 125 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Margie Baker, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 126  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Ebbets Field Middle School School DBN: 17K352 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Jeanne Rowe Title Principal Veronica Mullen-Morris Assistant Principal Ersell Mellis Parent Coordinator Galina Kopylova ENL/Bilingual Teacher Saronda Gil Baptise Parent John Romano Teacher/Subject Area N/A Teacher/Subject Area Celeste Walker Anita Ighodaro Coach Coach Jacqueline Allen School Counselor Clarence Ellis Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Marlig Moranta Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/26/2018 06/26/2018 06/26/2018 06/26/2018 06/26/2018 06/26/2018 06/26/2018 06/26/2018 06/26/2018 06/28/2018 06/28/2018 2018-19 CEP-RISE 127  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 17K352 School Name: Ebbets Field Middle School Superintendent: Clarence Ellis The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Gloria Ersell Falcon teacher Youngblood-Mellis Parent coordinator yes no yes yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Each year we take the data from the HLIS (Part III) surveys, and Student Emergency Contact cards to determine what language groups are represented in our school. We also use a few ATS reports to help to determine the translation and interpretation needs of parents in our school. These reports include School Level Adult Preferred Language Report (RAPL), Citywide/District Parents’ Preferred Language Report (RCPL), School Level Emergency Contact Form (RECF), School Level Emergency Contact Student List (RCON), School Level Adult Detail Report (RADL), and Citywide/District/School Home Language Report (RHBG), RHLA - home language of the students.This year we have five languages represented at EFMS (English, Spanish, Arabic, Haitian Creole, Fulani.) Our parent coordinator usually conducts a survey to assess language preferences of the parents. We are usually successful in securing translations for Arabic, Spanish, French, French-Creole and Haitian Creole both in written and oral communication.However, we have some difficulty communicating written documents in some ot the African 2018-19 CEP-RISE 128  languages, e.g. Fulani (which has only oral variety), but we use on the phone interpreter who can provide translation from English to Fulani. We also work with the DOE's T&I Unit to have interpreters available for both over-the -phone interpretation and on-site interpretation at open school nights.parent outreach, and during meetings with parents. Each teacher has one lesson a week of parent outreach put into his individual schedule.The administrators ask for the copies of parent outreach to be put in a special box in the Principal's office.Moreover,we have purchased the magic ear and can provide real time translations during PTA and Community Meetings. We have our parent handbooks translated into Spanish, Arabic and French. We use a variety of translation programs to translate documents in real time. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic Fulani Haitian Creole English Spanish Sudanese 12 4 12 56 46 0 5.22 1,74 5.22 67.83 20 0 12 4 12 153 48 1 5.22 1.74 5.22 66.52 20.87 0.43 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities September How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Available in all languages represented at school.French is used for Fulani speaking parents. Parent's Guide to Language Access September /initial orientation for covered languages 2018-19 CEP-RISE 129  P-T Conference Announcements September/November/March/May ELL entitlement/nonentitlement/continued entitlement letters. September and throughout the year when new ELLs are registered Parent Curriculum Conference September/October and while identifying new ELLs during the school year. New York State testing dates March/April/May Letters from the school leadership and newsletters from the principal throughout the year School Calendar monthly Trips’/ Events Notifications(PD for Parents) as needed We use DOE Intranet template(s) for covered languages; we use school-based bilingual personnel and translation vendor for non-covered languages We use DOE Intranet templates translated into primary languages. We use DOE T&I Unit for translation into covered languages, school-based bilingual personnel and translation vendor for non-covered languages if we have any. We use school bilingual staff, DOE T&I Unit for translation into covered languages, and translation vendor for translation into non-covered languages We use bilingual staff, DOE T&I Unit for translation into covered languages, and translation vendor for translation into non-covered languages We print it in two languages: English and Spanish We use bi-lingual staff, DOE T&I Unit for translation into covered languages 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Parent-Teacher Conferences September/November/March/May provide interpretation service(s)? We use over-the-phone interpretation service; bilingual school personnel, we also hire live interpreters 2018-19 CEP-RISE 130  Open School Night September Home coming Carnival September PTA meetings monthly Open house "Lights on After School" October Initial ELLs Parent Orientation September/at the time of the registration throughout the school year. Fall Harvest Festival for ELLs and IEP students parents October Individual meetings with ELLs parents (at least once a year) throughout the school year. Parent workshops monthly We use bilingual school staff; for other languages we bring on-site interpreters from the vendor agency. We use bilingual school staff; for other languages we bring on-site interpreters from the vendor We use bilingual school staff; and English -speaking bilingual parents help to interpret for parents of new-coming ELLs. We use bilingual school staff; and English -speaking bilingual parents help to interpret for parents of new-coming ELLs. For conferencing in other covered languages we use on the phone interpretation. We use bilingual school staff; We use over-the-phone interpretation service, bring on-site interpreters from the vendor agency . We use bilingual school staff; and English -speaking bilingual parents help to interpret for parents of new-coming ELLs. For conferencing in other covered languages we invite live interpreters. For conferencing in other covered languages we invite live interpreters,or/and bilingual staff. We use bilingual school staff; and English -speaking bilingual parents help to interpret for parents of new-coming ELLs. For conferencing in other covered languages we invite live interpreters. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency we will use our bilingual staff and Over-the phone DOE Interpretation Services. To reach the parent on the cell-phone, we have to dial given number, choose the language either Spanish or other , dial school's DBN and dictate the interpreter the number of the parent's phone. On reverse, for LEP parents to reach school personnel, they need to call 311 and name the number of the desired person. We also have many staff members that are able to assist our parents with oral/written interpretation. The school administration ensures that the level of provided written and/or oral interpretation services represents a level of language that is objective and accurate. Should no one be available, we ask members of parent volunteer committee to assist us. We will also update our school safety plan, ensuring that in case of emergency parents in need of language access services are not prevented from reaching the school’s administrative offices due to language barriers. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 131  We will obtain a translation from the Translation and Interpretation Unit into the language of the parents' choice in and forms required for this section in advance. We will post and provide such forms so that parents in need of language access services are not prevented from reaching administrative office due to the language barrier. We will also use School Level Emergency Contact Forms (RECF) and School Level Emergency Contact Student List (RCON) if needed.Parent coordinator regularly uses school messenger which provides automated telephone calls translations into Spanish and French. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. At the first faculty conference the Administration will review the procedures and emphasize the importance of translating important documents to be sent home. All staff will be made aware of the various languages represented at EFMS. Every staff member will receive a T&I brochure, Language ID Guide, and Language Palm Card. Staff will be encouraged and reminded of their responsibility of open communication with parents of ELLs on the regular basis. All parties will be made aware of the resources available here at the school as well as outside resources. Our school Language Access Coordinator will turnkey to the school personnel on how to use translation services proposed by NYCDOE site for ELLs, over-the-phone and on-site interpretation service. EFMS personnel will be trained on policies and procedures as well. School compliance will be monitored by the administration and Language Access Coordinator to ensure that all relevant school personnel are aware and follows the procedures. The Language Access Coordinator in team with parent coordinator will utilize the Language Access Kit provided by the Translation and Interpretation Unit to help address language barriers within the school. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) All parents will be provided with information regarding their rights to have a translator if necessary as well as the procedures for attaining these services. Ebbets Field Middle School will fulfill Section VII of the Chancellor's Regulations A-663 by determining within 30 days of a student's enrollment the primary language spoken by the parent of each student. If such language is not English, it is determined whether the parent requires language assistance in order to communicate effectively with the school. Each LEP parent will be provided with a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities, a copy of the Achieve NYC Guide, and a copy of the Parent Guide to Language access in their primary language. We will maintain current records of the primary language in ATS, 2018-19 CEP-RISE 132  as well as on students’ Emergency Cards. The school will continue to use all of translation options and selections. We will also post in a conspicuous location at or near the primary entrance sign in Spanish, French, Haitian Creole, and Arabic, indicating the availability of interpretation services. We will update our school safety plan, ensuring that parents in need of language access services are not prevented from reaching the school’s administrative offices due to language barriers. We will obtain a translation from the Translation and Interpretation Unit into the language of the signage and forms required for this section. We will post and provide such forms in accordance with this requirements. For example, to provide a Welcome Poster in the home languages of our ELLs, parent coordinator will e-mail a translation request form to T&I Unit in advance.Parents' Guide to Language Access is available for parents in nine languages , Language ID Guides will be stored at security desk and main office for anyone to take. We will continue to seek out services through the community and parent volunteers.Parents may choose to rely on an adult friend/companion or relative for language and interpretation services. We are aware of the fact that students and other children (minors under the age of 18) may not serve as interpreters for school staff and parents during any formal or informal meeting where student achievement and/or student conduct are discussed. In this way the school will fulfill Section VII of Chancellor’s Regulations A-663 regarding parental notification requirements for translation and interpretation services, so their right to receive information is fulfilled. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? In Ebbets Field Middle School, we will gather feedback from parents through conversations parents have with our teaching staff, our parent coordinator, and our administration. There are parent orientation meetings which are scheduled on regular basis. At these meetings parents of the current ELLs, new transitional ELLs from the elementary school, and recent arrivals have an opportunity to meet the teachers and discuss their academic needs and concerns. This is one way we evaluate the needs of the parents. We will also use the information from the Learning Environment Survey. Our school will create and distribute a parent survey to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services. Ongoing communication with ELL families during Parent Engagement Tuesdays will be used to gather input from parents and provide an opportunity for parents to voice their ideas and suggestions. We also hold cultural events such as international talent shows, Family Night events, and projects that involve parents and families.Monthly PA meetings and regular surveys help to indicate and evaluate the needs of parents. Ebbets Field Middle school all teachers regularly reach the parents during specially designated weekly parent outreach hours embedded in their schedule. An annual survey will be sent at the end of the year to LEP parents asking them about language assistance provided during the school year,that will help to monitor provisions of language services and improve them in accordance with the survey results. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 133 
