2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP-CS) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 17K354 School Name: THE SCHOOL OF INTEGRATED LEARNING Principal: MONIQUE CAMPBELL 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School of Integrated Learning 17K354 School Number (DBN): 331700010354 6,7,8 1224 Park Place, Brooklyn, New York 7187740362 Phone Number: 7187740521 Fax: Monique Campbell Mcampbell3@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Email Address: Monique Campbell Jason Varon JeraineCampos and Marie Pierre Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Jason Varon Marie Pierre CBO Representative: Amanda Bernadine District Information Geographical District: 17 Superintendent’s Office Address: Clarence Ellis Superintendent: 1224 Park Place, Brooklyn, NY, 11213 CELLIS3@SCHOOLS.NYC.GOV Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 221 4372 Phone Number: 7182214326 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Brooklyn South FSC. MauriciereDeGovia FSC: Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: Brooklyn Field Support Center - South 415 89th Street, Room 409 Brooklyn NY 11209 MDegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: Executive Director’s Office Address: 718-759-4862 718-630-1634 Fax: Phone Number:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Monique Campbell Jason Varon JeraineCampos Sherrie Williams Marie Pierre Amanda Bernadine Betty Nieves KerveneLowrie *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, Sports and Arts in Schools Foundation Member/Parent Grades UFT Teacher Center Teacher   PaulineBurke Danielle Chung Candice James N/A Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Parent/Grade 6 Parent/ Grade 6 Parent/ Grade 6 Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Student/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Vision: My vision for The School of Integrated Learning is to form a “ Professional Learning Community” where as a “team ” we are able to do “whatever it takes” to ensure academic and emotional success for our students and all members of our school community. Mission: We at The School of Integrated Learning guide our community individually and collectively towards success by making good choices that address academic needs and enhance social development, while awakening and nurturing interests and talents. In carrying out the school’s mission and actualizing the vision of its leader, we have   created a culture of collaboration and transparency where “ success for all ” is the driving force behind the choices. Consequently, we have put systems in place that propel us to strive towards embedding processes to support this goal-vision. Our mission has become a living document continually seeking interpretation and application. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Innovative teacher-led practices ● The House System fosters positive behavior and academic excellence, using colleges (Harvard, Princeton, and Columbia) as house names and to build school norms. It is used to support self and peer regulation of behavior and academics. The House system has been extended this school year to include competitions among students in sports and other team activities. ● Study Halls: Providing lunch and after school academic and behavioral support to all students as necessary. ● Tutorial System: Peer tutoring: Teachers match students for academic intervention, where the mentee identifies his area of need and the mentor creates a learning plan and tasks to meet the mentee’s needs. ● PROSE Collaborative Teaching Model : Teachers collapse large classes to create Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT), which provides extended time for learning. One teacher provides the content area expertise while the other teacher is able to provide strategic scaffolding in a separate location (either advanced or those needing remediation). This model supports Collaborative lesson planning : Sharing of content, strategies, protocols and inter-visiting in instructional rounds to give feedback, looking at students’ work together (using notices to support instruction). ● Teacher Leaders : Teacher leaders work to support colleagues by providing low inference feedback in areas of instructional practices, lesson planning, assessment and classroom management. ● Grade leaders : Planning and facilitating grade meetings, sharing best practices to interconnect subjects; debriefing inter-visitations. ● Teacher Led professional development: in Inquiry teams, grade and subject meetings and Turnkey Mondays when they turnkey external PDs to build strong teacher leadership and solid classroom competency. ● Students’ data- driven goal setting: allow students frequent interactions with assessment data & cognizance of their strengths and challenges; Revisions following mastery; Regular Curriculum planning, using assessment data for revisions. Collaboration with parents & partners Current: Counseling in Schools & Community Schools: In support of students' social emotional development Counseling in Schools provide services to families in the areas of social work, therapeutic art, counseling. These services started 4 years ago when the school absorbed the students of the now defunct MS 334. These supports were given to students to address the social-emotional needs in a significant way. ● NY Cares: This organization provides programs for students in drama, writing etc. Groups also paint murals, do clean-ups and provide coats for families yearly. They also started a “Write for toys” drive in the past 2 school years. In this drive all students who write request letters are granted the wishes on their list by donors procured through NY Cares. 0  ● Urban Tech: This organization has partnered with us to support our implementation of their anti-bullying program-Dignity for All. ● Brooklyn Botanical Gardens/ Project Green Reach provides students the opportunity to explore kitchen botany and containerized gardening. ● New York Edge(Formerly Sports and Arts in Schools Foundation (SASF) : Social and academic supports- STEM, leadership, book clubs, dance, music, drama, sports etc. Sports and Arts in Schools Foundation (SASF) provides daily 3 hour after-school program for all students incorporating the arts and sports with academic and homework help. ● High School Night hosted by the guidance counselor to provide parents with orientation and information about the high school application process and inviting high schools to present on their programs ● Annual Career Day : Professionals from a plethora of businesses, organizations in the neighborhood and beyond come in to the school and share insights into careers, supporting us to prepare students for college and careers ● Urban Advantage School : Partnering with this organization gives support in science instruction. Provides trips for students to extend knowledge and apply scientific principles Annual Parent Appreciation Dinner : for parents of students on the Honor Roll. ● Parent workshops provided in core subjects Innovations/promising programs ● Saturday School and Holiday Intensives to provide intense academic support in math , Social Studies, science and ELA, extending the learning time for students ● Peer tutoring program in math and ELA ● Regents classes in science, SS and math ● C.H.A.M.P.S. program for sports enrichment after school ● Student of the Week/ Month programs to honor students leadership and social skills ● PBIS- Positive Behavior Interventions and Supports program to support positive behavior and respect for all ● Participation in Penny Harvest, City Food Drive, Annual coat drive for families, Red Nose Day, National No one Eats Alone Day, Cancer Awareness Day ● Mothers’/Fathers’ Day Celebrations and Secret Pal programs among staff to support positive staff morale and camaraderie which positively impacts relationships with students. Participation in city/State programs District science competition ELT School 1  Partnership with MSQI, Expanded Ed. and LDC 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our school caters to the needs of students in temporary housing (STH), SWD's and ELL's 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Success in providing quality education Academic Success ● Well Developed on Quality Review ● Students sat for 3 Regents this year. For the first time 7th grade students sat for science regents. ● Increase in percentage of students improving scores in MOSL pre and post-tests; ● Increase in number of students scoring level 2 and above on benchmark assessments ● Increased number of students who met the criteria for promotion on state math and ELA Tests ● We started a fast track academic program in collaboration with Medgar Evers HS. Students in this group took Mandarin classes and acceleratedMath, science SS and ELA classes. These students will sit 3 or 4 Regents examinations next year in their grade 7 year. Behavioral success In addition to using the online Positive Behavior Interventions and Support (PBIS) system of rewards to encourage positive behaviour among students, we introduced an anti bullying program called Dignity for All. This program was implemented through the support of a partnership with Urban Tech: Strengths and Focus Our area of most significant progress was ELA in which students in all grades made progress on the state tests. Our key area of focus this year is to continue to strengthen student performance in mathematics., building conceptual understanding, strengthening collaborative discussions around math concepts in a student centered learning environment. Another focus area is to develop fluency through reading, writing, academic vocabulary and subject specific protocols. Aditionally, we need to continue focusing on science in order to ensure a robust accelerated science program that allows 6th graders to take Regents science and more 7th graders to do science Regents- to increase the number of students doing the Regents exams in science. We also have to ensure that the accelerated science program for 6th grade is robust and rigorous as well as paced to support success in students sitting for the REGENTS 2  3  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 17K354 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 254 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 26 26 6 11 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 23 23 8 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 92.0% % Attendance Rate 90.6% % Reduced Lunch 7.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.2% 15.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 13.25 5% 11% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 53.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 20 18 91.5% 3.5% 24.0% 81.1% 2.8% 1.2% 2 16% 5.4 45.7% 48% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Our strength is that we have done a lot of work around multiple entry points. 3 years ago it was our instructional focus. It is an area that we focus on in classroom observations and feedback. Every teacher is aware of the expectations for creating access for all students and to varying degrees create multiple entry points for all students. Another strength of our school is that teachers engage students in some collaborative discussions in lessons some of the times. Based on the results of the NYS Math and ELA examination, we see that students have made small growth in their performance. In math students demonstrated a 43% proficiency in 2014 to 46% proficiency in 2018. In ELA, students demonstrated an 18% proficiency in 2014 to 52% proficiency. In common planning teams, as teachers look at student work, it is evident that explicit Math and ELA instruction is needed, to develop and enhance students' conceptual understanding. Therefore, in order for these numbers to increase, there must be continued focus on students’ progress in math. We need to strengthen our practices in using multiple entry points and collaborative discussions not only in math but across all contents, using common protocols in order to ramp up conceptual understanding in math. We need to ground our classroom instruction in strategies which create a student centered classroom consistently. 2. A priority need which will be addressed is to provide students with targeted supports in Math and ELA by making adjustments to the curriculum and curriculum materials. We made adjustments to our math and ELA program to ConnectEd-McGraw Hill Education. We believe this program is properly paced, provides a built in data tracking and assessment, is differentiated for the needs of all students and is technology compatible for assessment and instruction. The program also allows for ongoing assessments and data tracking. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, guided by instructional protocols (CER, RACE) in all content areas, student performing at a level one will demonstrate a 5% decrease, as reflected on their performance on the New York State Math and English Language Arts exam. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will implement these strategies. school coach and school administrators will oversee the strategies. Teachers will create and maintain academically rigorous , student centered classroom, using multiple entry points and collaborative discussions daily. All students Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Teachers will receive professional development by curriculum specialists to unpack and deepen understanding and implementation of the Connect-Ed programs. Teachers and para-professionals will be developed in Universal Design of Learning principles which stress access for all students and provide strategies and approaches for multiple entry points, collaborative and student centered learning Teachers will continue to unpack ( probe, become comfortable, view videos associated with materials) to map the curricula and make ongoing adjustments during the 2018-19 academic year. In Math, performance tasks related to mathematical strands will be assigned to students and evidenced in the students' portfolios. Students will be instructed and supported to write evidence-based explanations of their mathematical thinking and practices/processes; trained in procedural and conceptual writing about number sense, algebra, geometry and in developing logical reasoning. Students will write about mathematical applications in the real world. In ELA, culminating end of unit tasks will be assigned to students, and evidenced in students portfolios. Students will be instructed and supported to write evidence-based explanations of their 6  critical thinking and processes, and make connections and applications to the real world. Another critical element will be the supports for SWDs and ELLs by differentiation, multiple entry points other UDL principles, and integrating technology. Periodically throughout the year, professional development sessions will be offered to parents on all the instructional strategies in PTA meetings throughout the year and in the 40 minutes on Tuesday extended day, including parent workshops related to the contents of the Common Core NYS Math exams, family evenings and other school-wide events such as parent raffles during parent teacher conferences. Sept. 2018 to June 2019 ELL’S and SWD’s will be primary targets; however, all students will receive the instruction in strategic writing instruction Parents/ families Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Teachers and administrators will be given strategic professional development from the district , borough field support center and UFT Teacher Center Staff. Teachers and students July 2018-June 2019 ● Students will engage in project based learning. Teachers will monitor and assess student learning and providing feedback to students. They will provide effective instruction which is : ● Student centered ● Teacher facilitated ● Technology integrated As a result, classes will have/engage in: o Cooperative group- Peer supported o Accountable talk Teachers will implement these strategies. External coaches, school coaches, teacher leaders and school administrators will oversee the strategies. The Parent Coordinator, teachers and administrators will jointly conduct sessions. Contracted Providers will implement where applicable. Administrators and teacher leaders will also provide professional development in certain areas. 7 o Multiple resources o Print rich environment o Neat/clean/welcoming atmosphere o Organization for maximum effort Multiple Entry Points: Teachers use Multiple Intelligence survey to identify students’ highest intelligence and learning style. Teachers will plan lessons to accommodate students’ learning according to students’ multiple intelligences. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Periodically throughout the year, professional development sessions will be offered to parents on all the instructional strategies in PTA meetings throughout the year and in the 40 minutes on Tuesday extended day, including parent workshops related to the contents of the Common Core NY Math exam and UDL principles, family evenings and other school-wide events such as parent raffles during parent teacher conferences. Teachers will provide PD sessions. The CBO will plan and facilitate sessions for parents Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax levy; ELT grant,SASF,CBO ● Subject-based Teacher Team meetings  Grade Team Meetings  Math Teacher Team Meeting  New Teacher Support Team Meeting  Scheduled inter-visitations by Coaches to observe and implement best common practices ● Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, teacher team leaders will provide Pd for parents on assessment protocol ● Parent Coordinator creates and mails parent handbook which outlines assessment protocol ● Funding necessary for the procurement of testing materials (e.g. I Ready) 8  ● Provide teachers with IPADS for data collection and dissemination to parent ● Purchasing of I-ready licenses; educational consultants to support implementation ● Teachers w attend external and internal PDs or engaged in common planning. Funding will be used for bringing in substitute for per diem activities ● Scheduling for inter/intra-school PDs ● OTPS for students consumables and other CCLS-aligned materials ● TL NYSTL Funds for equipment, library books and software ● Title 1 SWP for parental involvement into PD sessions ● The use of professional period and development of rubrics for looking at students’ work ● Purchase ink and copy paper Funding will be necessary to ensure that relevant technology is in place, the instructional materials (e.g. books) and qualified personnel or providers are secured for successful implementation of every aspects of the plan. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, a minimum of 85% of students will complete half of their rubric based portfolio assessment tasks. All students should have at least 3 completed assessments in Math and ELA. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Portfolio entries in each content area Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? We have started implementation of a whole school program to strengthen students respect for differences and to promote anti–bullying, since students are still reporting covert and overt instances of bullying. This program gives direct instruction two times weekly in a curriculum that teaches appropriate and inappropriate behaviors in relation to respecting the dignity of all. This program is possible because of the school's partnership with Urban Tech organization who provide materials and personnel including training and in class support for staff. Our strength in providing social-emotional support to students is also grounded in our CBO Counseling in Schools. Counseling in school staffs our school daily with 3 social workers and an art therapists. This group of service providers provide one on one counseling /therapy for students and organize services for families. This group provide a wide gamut of services from attendance support including wake-up calls, to celebrations for students, to support for outside initiatives, creating an awareness of world hunger through Red Nose Day, to providing every type of aid ti students and families in temporary housing, to classroom support for teachers and students, tp providing food for hungry students. In the most recent school learning survey, the students’ responses indicated that they felt safe in their school. However, during the last school year there were superintendent and principal suspensions which directly correlate to elements of students’ inappropriate behaviors and discipline infractions. Since there is a direct correlation between students’ behavior and performance it is critical to strengthen behaviors through a systematic program. This will ensure that the school promote and maintain positive behaviors in order to obtain an upward trend in students’ performance. Also, the school is working on bridging stronger gaps between the home, school and community organizations for providing better structures for the families to deal with the social challenges which may be affecting students’ behavior. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, staff will implement anti-bullying curriculum and offer incentives for positive behavior resulting in 2% decrease of bullying reports in OORS. 0 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Teachers, guidance counselor and administrators, CBO; Community Schools/CIS All students Sept. 2018-June 2019 Teachers, guidance counselor and administrators, CBO; Community Schools/CIS Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Full implementation of DIGNITY FOR ALL curriculum in grades 6, 7, 8  Development of Clubs or Advisory :Counseling in Schools staff will run advisory groups and offer counseling sessions  Use the ladder of supports referral system to deter imbalance in punitive discipline.  Train staff in de-escalation skills/strategies The Dignity for All and PBIS principles will continue to be posted in classroom, hallways, cafeteria, bathrooms, offices and stairwells. Keeping these principles in the line of sight of students and staff continually, will serve not only as a reminder of the tenets, but a strategy for embedded them in the thinking and culture of the community. Promote positive behavior through tangible incentives. School will align activities and processes with TAC-D principles to support embedding culturally responsive approaches to discipline. Mission/Vision/School Motto: In addition the Leadership Program will incorporate the teaching of the school’s mission, vision, motto and credo, in order to strengthen students’ sense of belonging and ownership of the school and its initiatives and to foster students’ sense of belonging to the end that they will want to come to school. School motto: Follow the rules; make good choices and learn something new everyday. 1 The administrator, guidance counselor, Attendance teacher, parent coordinator, school psychologist, CBOs partners (Sports and Arts in School Foundation and community schools, selected staff Administrators, parent coordinator, members of the PTA & SLT, teachers Teachers will reward students for classes with 100% attendance each month. A bulletin board for perfect attendance will continue to be displayed prominently in the hallway. It will publish the names of students who fit the criteria monthly. Pizza and ice-cream parties will be funded to celebrate attendance monthly. Students will also get to redeem choice bucks gained as attendance incentives in the school store. Students prone to absenteeism, SWD Students, ELL’S Sept. 2018 -June 2019 Students with disabilities, ELL’s, SIFE etcetera, will be fully involved in these programs with the support of special needs and ELL’s teachers, Para –professionals and guidance counselor, as needed. We are planning to involve students fully in the following activities in order to engage them in the school in order to support learning and growing: Student government   Assemblies (speakers, leading assembly program)   Respect for all in advisory  Open door policy to speak with administrators and In classroom- collaborative discussions counselors  Teacher mentors  Guidance counselor and social worker Parents will be involved in informational sessions regarding Advisory as part of the PTA Meetings. Parents Sept. 2018-June 2019 Information will be sent home to parents on the Advisory initiatives. We will invite parents to school-wide events used to celebrate students for positive behaviors, attendance and outstanding work or completion of the Advisory curriculum. We will also engage in the following supportive activities for parents and families: Parent Outreach, home visits, providing incentives for students, interest programs to encourage attendance . o Wake-up calls o School messengers o School counseling Attendance teacher works with counseling in schools to look at factors contributing to absenteeism and help teachers to implement structures to support social and emotional well-being in order to create positive attitude and interest in school counseling in school to help support peer group relationship 2 which will impact students’ in school interactions in order that students will want to attend. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Information will be sent home to parents on the Advisory initiatives. We will invite parents to school-wide events used to celebrate students for positive behaviors, attendance and outstanding work or completion of the Advisory curriculum. We will also engage in the following supportive activities for parents and families. Outreach, home visits, providing incentives for students, interest programs to encourage attendance including: Wake-up calls, school messengers and school counseling. Attendance teacher works with counseling in schools to look at factors contributing to absenteeism and help teachers to implement structures to support social and emotional well-being in order to create positive attitude and interest in school counseling in school to help support peer group relationship which will impact students’ in school CBO, Counseling in Schools director and staff, attendance teacher, parent coordinator , guidance counselor ,teachers and admin are responsible for implementation and oversight. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● CBOs (Sports and Arts in Schools and Community Schools) to implement social-emotional programs ● Guidance counselor is the leader of the PBIS team, and will continue to facilitate training sessions and implement the elements of the program to suit the needs of the students. ● Per session provided to select teachers for the development of Advisory curriculum. ● The use of tangible incentives in the School Store as part of the program ● Purchasing of items for the incentive program ● Parent Coordinator and Community Schools will provide Pd for parents on student’s social emotional needs. ● Teachers attend internal PDs or engaged in common planning for Advisory. Funding will be used for bringing in substitute for per diem activities ● Scheduling for inter/intra-school PDs ● OTPS for students consumables and other CCLS-aligned materials ● TL NYSTL Funds for equipment, Sean Covey library books and software ● Title 1 SWP for parental involvement into PD sessions ● Purchase ink and copy paper 3  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a minimal reduction of 1% reduction in incidents reported, as measured by the OORS. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We are a collaborative staff, and all teachers are committed to the success of their colleagues and students within the school community. Teachers informally inter-visit; the new teacher mentor organizes inter-visitation for new teachers; Another aspect of our strength in collaboration is that strength is that all teachers have an opportunity to collaboratively analyze and evaluate student trend data, as Common Planning Time is built into their programs. We need to continue to work to ensure that all teachers use data and assessment to drive instructional and curricular decisions. This data should be specific to student engagement and assessment of and during instruction. This will ensure that all students are provided with appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) based instruction that leads to students achieving their targeted goals. It will also ensure that all teachers are supported in improving pedagogical strategies in these areas and entrenching highly effective practices consistently. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will participate in inter-visitation and feedback cycles resulting in at least 2% improvement in student engagement and assessment data as measured by Advance. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administrators, Coach, Teacher leaders The strategies extend throughout the school year from Sept. 2018-June 2019  Bi-monthly, there will be 2 cycles of peer review and feedback on pedagogy conducted by teachers and education assistants in teams throughout the year Teachers & Students  Frequent cycles of inquiry based on student work from peer observation/review.]  Development of assessment and student engagement plan based on inquiry and peer review observation.  Staff will engage in team building PD  Data Wise Team will head grade and subject teams to conduct data-wise inquiry work, curriculum assessment and review, portfolio development, implementation and assessment process, professional development learning for teachers and education assistants.  Weekly Co-planning in grades, subject and across grade/subject teams will be used to continue to support all teachers in cementing a commonality of language about expectations and establishing the essential framework for learning. Teachers will collaborate, share ideas, resources, strategies and best practices to allow students to have repeated similar experiences with strategies across content areas. For example, teachers will use academic vocabulary across content areas to enhance students’ common understanding of words and phrases. In addition, teacher teams meet weekly to ‘look 6  at students’ work,’ write/revise curriculum maps, conduct gap / error analysis and make adjustments to curricula, assessment, and instruction. Therefore, daily and weekly common planning time was built into teachers’ schedules and the school-wide programming to accommodate this process. Every month, Inter-visitations will be a common practice among the staff around teacher use of data and assessment to inform practice.Teachers will have opportunities to experience how individualized instruction, for example, is implemented successfully in different classrooms; they will have opportunities to question and plan with their colleagues and the more experienced pedagogues. Coupled with this effort will be learning walks using the “critical friends” approach. Teams of staff including administration, teachers, and paraprofessionals will conduct walk-through of classes, observing and scripting the elements of best practices that are present and seeing how the portfolios reflect these practices. They will debrief these walks and plan next steps together, with the same team visiting struggling teachers, scripting the same ideas then discussing as “critical friends” to support the teacher. Weekly in-house and periodic outside Professional development on best practices around using data and assessment to plan instruction will be provided for teachers and paraprofessionals in order that students with disabilities and English language learners can benefit from the best available instructional practices. In order to involve parents and community in this collaborative process, we will hold monthly informational sessions during PTA meetings where we will have teacher teams present on the ideas in the plan and the work on collaboration in which they are engaged. We will also have the parent coordinator hold parent meetings with parents around collaboration and how parents and families can join in the collaborative process. On a weekly basis, we will continue to use SKEDULA to keep parents informed about classroom and school initiatives. We are rebuilt the school website. This website will be another avenue to ensure collaboration with families and communities as we update school initiatives regularly on this venue. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All Teaching staff From Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administrators, teachers, coach, teacher leaders( All teaching Staff Sept. 2018-June 2019 Teachers and admin Administration, teachers, parent coordinator Parents Sept 2018 November, 2018 March, 2019 May, 2019 How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 7  We will continue to use SKEDULA to keep parents informed about classroom and school initiatives. Also, we intend to use the school's website as another avenue to ensure collaboration with families and communities as we update school initiatives regularly on this venue. Teachers will implement Admin will oversee Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● I period per week for grade team and 1 period for subject team based meetings ● Teacher Incentive Fund (TIF) funds used to provide Peer Instructional coaches and model teachers, modeling, developing norms and common language among teachers and students in the implementation of curriculum, development of assessments, best teaching-learning practices and analysis of students’ work for the subject/grade ● The use of the instructional coach, teacher team and Lead Content Specialist for conducting walk-throughs with a critical eyes ● PDs for engagement in common planning funding will be necessary for using our teachers to cover classes during their preps, and being paid at per session rate or bringing in substitutes for per diem activities ● Scheduling for inter/intra-visitations ● Use of the Danielson Framework and NYCDOE Advance System for teachers’ evaluation and students’ progress ● The use of the specified protocol for the walkthrough and looking at students’ work ● The continued use and development of rubrics for looking at students’ work Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 at least 50% of the staff will have engaged in a minimum of 1 round of peer reviews. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Inter -visitations attendance sheets, logs, or reflection forms Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school's strengths lie in the fact that the principal has been consistent for 14 years. The school has shown tremendous growth in both student performance and student behavior. The school has had a consistent maintenance of A- rating for 4 years. However, although we have made gains in reading on the 2017-18 NY State Exam, there is a significant number of students whose literacy is still below competency. Also, there is a significant number of students writing at level two and below competency. There is a need to support the instructional staff with opportunities for professional development and inter-visitation, so that all teachers are able to increase the competency level of all students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leader will provide teachers and staff professional development and reflection opportunities to support sound pedagogical practices of staff in differentiated assessment- driven instruction resulting 95% of teachers trending effective or highly effective as measured by Advance. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan  All s teachers will receive professional development in lesson planning and questioning .  Formal observations will be conducted for each teacher based on UFT agreement and city-wide expectations. Teachers will be informally and/or formally observed at least 4 times for the year with the first observation beginning in September 2018. All Teachers School Leaders Sept. 2018-June 2019 November 2017- December 2017 Teachers will use data to determine the students who will engage in daily Academic Intervention Services (AIS) using research-based SRA Corrective Reading, Myon and Starfall. Students Sept. 2018 to June 2019 School Leaders Students with disabilities and English language learners Parents Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Teachers and Administrators Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Admin, Parent Coordinator Teachers and school leaders will engage in planning conversations and other feedback sessions. Teachers will use Universal Design for Learning to ensure access for all learners when planning curricula. Teachers will also be supported to make SMART Goals for the curricula. Parent workshops will orient parents to this leadership initiative. We will conduct these workshops during parent orientations and in regular PTA meetings as well as in letters sent home with updates regarding this goal and its progress. As part of the teaching-learning cycle, teachers are encouraged to invite parents to come in and be part of the instructional process. Parents will have the opportunity to sit in the classrooms, observe the lessons, and participate in the learning activities and discussions. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent workshops will orient parents to this leadership initiative. We will conduct these workshops during parent orientations and in regular PTA meetings as well as in letters sent home with updates regarding this goal and its progress. As part of the teaching-learning cycle, teachers are encouraged to invite parents to come in and be part of 0  the instructional process. Parents will have the opportunity to sit in the classrooms, observe the lessons, and participate in the learning activities and discussions. Teachers will implement and administrators will oversee. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Administrators require IPADS for low inference notetakings and feedback ● Teacher Incentive Fund (TIF) funds used to secure Peer Instructional coaches and model teachers, modeling, developing norms and common language among teachers and students in the implementation of curriculum, development of assessments, best teaching-learning practices and analysis of students’ work for the subject/grade ● The use of the instructional coach, teacher team and Lead Content Specialist for conducting walk-throughs with a critical eyes ● PDs for engagement in common planning funding will be necessary for using our teachers to cover classes during their preps, and being paid at per session rate or bringing in substitutes for per diem activities ● Scheduling for inter/intra-visitations ● Use of the Danielson Framework and NYCDOE Advance System for teachers’ evaluation and students’ progress Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. PROGRESS MONITORING-FEBRUARY 2019 By February 2019, teachers will receive at least 3 professional development sessions in lesson planning and questioning to support students to question and to set success criteria. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. lesson plans Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In the 2018-19 school year, we will continue to develop a vibrant and productive relationship with a new Community Based Organization (CBO), Sports and Arts in Schools Foundation (SASF). We also continued our strong ties with New York Cares, Urban Advantage, The Peoples’ Alliance Credit Union, VISION. We developed a new partnership with Interfaith Hospital, the Brooklyn Children’ Museum, initiating the Teen Thursday program. . All these partnerships have supported us in making stronger connections with families while strengthening our students’ academic awareness. These organizations underwrote parent activities as well as student activities-trips, concerts, work days immigration assistance, etcetera. Current partnership with CBOs such as New York Cares, Sports and Arts, and Inter faith Hospital will facilitate the improvement of the home-school engagement. A series of activities were implemented thus far to build relationships and will continue throughout the year at different times of the day to accommodate all families Although we have established relationships with most of our parents, there is a need to develop much stronger family and community ties, as evidenced in parent attendance at most school events. The aim is to provide students and families with the supports, continue to foster relationships with community services to address identified family needs, and provide professional development for staff on developing partnerships with families and/or the community. We need to continue to monitor partnerships and feedback from staff, family and the community to increase services that aid families in supporting the student achievement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, administration and staff will facilitate a variety of initiative to promote parent engagement as evidenced by at least 50% parent attendance at school events throughout the year. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Community Based Organizations, (CBO’s) will continue to infuse social emotional programs/ services (counseling) for students and their families Students & Families Sept. 2018-June 2019 CBO’s, Administration Monthly Professional development will be provided for teachers and parents by some of these CBO’s like Urban Advantage and Brooklyn Botanical Gardens for science teachers. Some will also offer parent and student workshops and students( Brooklyn Children’s Museum, UNICEF, Brooklyn Botanical Gardens) Teachers, parents , students, community Sept. 2018-June 2019 CBO’s, Administration SWD’s, ELL’s, all students Sept. 2018-June 2019 Admin; teachers; service providers Parents Sept. 2018-June 2019 Admin; teachers/ staff Several outreach programs will be organized monthly such as: Dad and me, family game night, Yoga fitness clubs, parent book clubs, and workshops, throughout the school year to involve the families. On a weekly basis, all staff members will be involved in establishing a climate where parents and community involvement are actively solicited. We must ensure that they feel welcome, respected, trusted, heard, and needed as part of the school. Programs will be created to encourage school-family contacts such as parent workshops, community fairs, designing projects to increase teacher-parenting collaboration, and PTA involvement. Parents will also be invited to become learning leaders who will work side by side with the parent coordinator by actively interacting in the school environment. As a means of parent outreach, on Tuesdays between 2:20 – 3:45 PM, teachers will meet with parents to discuss academic and social concerns particularly for our struggling students. Special arrangements will be made for families to accommodate them at a different time during the day. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 3  New York Cares, Counseling in School, SASF Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● CBOs (Sports and Arts in Schools and Community Schools) to implement social-emotional programs ● OTPS for students consumables and purchasing of items for the incentive program ● Parent Coordinator and Commnity Schools will provide Pd for parents on student’s social emotional needs. ● Scheduling for inter/intra-school PDs ● TL NYSTL Funds for equipment and software ● Title 1 SWP for parental involvement into PD sessions ● Purchase ink and copy paper ● The parent coordinator in conjunction with the teachers will organize a series of parent outreach programs. ● Funding for purchasing parent materials or items for parent meetings or events ● Funding to transport students where necessary to CBO or community-based sponsored events ● Funding for setting up events on a school level Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. PROGRESS MONITORING FEBRUARY 2019 By February 2019 at least one new family event monthly should be planned and implemented. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Sign in sheets for activities Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Myon Reading Program Small groups-Pull-out/push During the school day 5x per week Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students receiving a level 1 on state ELA exam or ascore of 40 or below on the DRP assessment. Students reading below grade level Students demonstrating limited proficiency on the ELA practice Exams Mathematics Students who received level 1 in the state exam Students demonstrating limited proficiency on the math practice Exams Starfallreading program SRA Corrective Reading Program Accountable Talk/ Collaborative discussions Guided Reading/Writing Think/Pair/Share Turn & Talk Close Reading Real world connections Saturday Academy Extended Learning Time; i-READY math SETSS Program Small group direct instruction tutoring 2 - 5 X PER WEEK 5X PER WEEK Small groups-Pull-out/push During the school day SETSS Program One-one tutoring Saturday Academy 5  MATHLAB 2X PER WEEK During the school day During the school day Saturday Academy After School Sessions Science Students scoring a level 1 on MOSL Pre-tests Field trips to cultural and Science institutions Small groups Students demonstrating limited proficiency on the practice or diagnostic Exams/CCLS-aligned Writing Task Scientific Inquiry Creating models Scientific Inquiry by means of secondary research Social Studies Students scoring a level 1 on MOSL Pre-tests At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students with IEP requirements; students identified by teachers SBST or parental requests Controlled experiment Discussion Groups Oral Presentations Close Reading Accountable Talk Turn and Talk Leveled Groupings Reading and Listening Emphasis on academic vocabulary Close Reading One-on-One Small Groups Testing Evaluations Small groups During the school day Saturday Academy After School Sessions Small groups During the school day 6  Observations Round Table discussions Expression through Art Training and utilizing the services of the Paraprofessionals 7  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 39 students altogether; 25 of whom are doubled up, and 12 in shelters. 2 in other 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. - Advisory and leadership trainings - Social and emotional support through counseling both by DOE guidance counselor and the social workers and art therapist from Counseling in Schools - Care kits with hygiene products - Food and meals beyond breakfast and lunch-including healthy meal at extended day and meal products from food drives. - Sponsored trips and enrichment opportunities as necessary. - Uniforms where necessary. - Books and school supplies as necessary. - Success mentors to aid attendance, punctuality and school engagement. - Parent engagement activities for parents. This will neccessitate that Community School workers and Parent coordinators check in with these parents on a weekly basis and laise between them and school. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). Not applicable 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 8  Not applicable 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. Not applicable 9  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. In the recruitment of highly qualified staff, school teams comprising the principal or assistant principal , the parent coordinator, dean and one or two teachers in different subject areas scout and interview suitable candidates to suit the school’s demographics and student needs at the DOE’s hiring fairs. Selected teachers are invited to conduct a demo lesson in their licensed area, do a walk-through of the school, as well as the rigorous reference and experience check. The hiring team then comes to a consensus about the interview candidate. To ensure that the school retains teachers who are highly qualified, mentors are assigned not only to first year teachers but to teachers who are new to the school. In addition to pairing a new teacher with a mentor, each week the principal and curriculum coordinator as well as the lead teacher, conduct teacher team meetings by grades or departments to provide support and information about the curriculum, best practices, DOE policies, school culture and any other information that would support the teachers’ professional development. The school also strives to maintain an air of openness and collaboration amongst the staff. There is inter-visitation through skyping as well as the physical visits, of classrooms on an informal and formal basis whereby teachers get to view one another through a common lens for instruction and classroom rituals/routines and management. Teachers will also collaborate in weekly grade meetings and share lesson strategies and best practices, and brainstorm ways of addressing students’ needs through remediation, grouping, extra help, and additional teacher support. By asset mapping, teachers are strategically placed in assignments based on their strengths and needs. Each module that houses students for their core classes is homogenously grouped (by grade), and veteran teachers are partnered with novice teachers. This is especially seen in the ICT classrooms whereby the culture of the school and house-keeping and are transferred from one teacher to another. Advantages to this module would also include a balance of skills and instructional support in each module which would enable teachers to provide targeted instruction to students and not become overwhelmed by the expectations. 1 The key vehicle in achieving all of this is providing the staff with relevant professional development, research based framework for enhancing professional practice for observations, effective evidence based feedback, and a climate conducive of professional growth and achievement 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development 0  Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Built into our school programming are collaborative team planning times, weekly grade, subject, department meetings. There are also a weekly Tuesday afternoon collaborative team sessions. These sessions are for teachers to attend in-house professional development sessions facilitated by in house experts, Instructional Coach and Lead Teachers, DOE talent coaches or other invited presenters. Topics are selected based on our needs and on the school’s yearly PD Plan or the city-wide Expectations. The district provides monthly professional development in math and ELA. These are turn-keyed to the rest of staff. Additionally, in the summer of 2018 teachers, and administrators attended the various workshops on MIDDLE SCHOOL QUALITY INITIATIVE-MSQI. Our school is an Urban Advantage school. As a result we are privy to the professional developments workshops specifically for science. We also collaborate with the Brooklyn Museum and some of our teachers are trained in their Project Green Reach program which augments their repertoire of science skills and strategies. .We also are a CITE school, Arts Matter and a LITERACY DESIGN COLLABORATIVE school (LDC) All these organizations provide professional development for teachers. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Not Applicable 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Not Applicable Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). NA 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments 1  Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. ● The School provides ongoing professional development to all teachers in analyzing assessment data to increase teachers’ understanding of students’ performance and strengthening teacher practice. ● The School provides ongoing differentiated professional development regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. ● The School community selected and agreed upon the selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures to be implemented for the MOSL/Advance teacher ratings. Teachers are members of the MOSL team that decided on the measures of students’ progress and how teachers will be rated by the city and state according to the progress shown by students according to the outlined measures. ● Teachers comprise the curriculum teams which decide and map curricula that include various types of assessments of students’ progress. Built-into the curricula are formative and summative assessments. ● Professional development on testing protocols is done by the testing coordinator who turnkeys assessment/testing strategies as informed from city or network workshops. ● Teachers are members of the principal’s cabinet. Included in scheduled meetings are discussions on the use and effectiveness of assessments across the school. Teacher teams meet weekly to plan and evaluate assessments. Teachers collaboratively plan scope and sequence and assessment of curricula. ● Teachers meet weekly to examine students’ work to identify common trends and to decide next steps for instruction. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal Federal 240,951,096 12,366 x X 2 Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 20,25,29,33,37 20,25,33  Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 2,1,917,233 X 20,25,29,33,37 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs. 3   Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 4  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) MS 354 Parent and Family Engagement Policy In compliance with Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), schools are responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families they serve. Cognizant of the crucial nature of cohesion between administration, school staff, students, parents and the community in general, our school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Teacher Association, and Title I Parent Advisory Committee. Additionally, The School of Integrated Learning Middle School 354 agrees to: Be governed by the following statutory definition of parental involvement, and will carry out programs, activities, and procedures in accordance with this definition: Parental involvement means the participation of parents in regular, two-way, and meaningful communication involving student academic learning and other school activities, including (A) that parents play an integral role in assisting their child’s learning (B) that parents are encouraged to be actively involved in their children’s education at school (C) that parents are full partners in their children’s education and are included, as appropriate, in decision-making and on advisory committees to assist in the education of their children (D) the carrying out of other activities, such as those described in section 1118 of the 5  ● Involve the parents of children served in Title I, Part A in decisions about how Title I, Part A funds reserved for parental involvement are spent. ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 31 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ADOPTION The School of Integrated Learning Middle School 354 Parental Involvement Plan has been revised jointly with, and agreed on with, parents of children participating in Title I program, as evidence by meeting minutes. The Parental Involvement Policy/Plan was revised by The School of Integrated Learning Middle School 354 on 6.20.2018 and will be in effect for the period of the school year. The school will distribute this Parental Involvement Policy/Plan to all parents of participating Title I children and make it available to the community on or before 12.19.2018 . Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students In carrying out the parental involvement requirements of this part, districts and schools, to the extent practical, shall provide full opportunities for the participation of parents with children with limited English proficiency, parents with children with disabilities, and parents of migratory children, including information and school reports in a format and to the extent practical, in a language such parents can understand. Activity/Task Timeline Language Access Survey for new ESL students Upon admittance Program selection for new ESL students Upon admittance Orientation workshop for new ESL students Fall 2018 IEP workshops Translation services Fall and Spring 2018-19 Throughout the school year Staff Responsible ESL teacher Parent Coordinator ESL teacher Parent Coordinator ESL teacher Parent Coordinator ESL teacher, Guidance Counselor, Special Education teachers and Parent Coordinator. ESL teacher, Parent Coordinator he School of Integrated Learning Middle School 354 will: Parental Involvement and School Quality 6  ● Jointly develop/revise with parents the school parental involvement policy and distribute it to parents of participating children also making it available to the entire school community ● Jointly conduct, with the involvement of parents, an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of the school’s parental involvement policy ● Use the findings of the parental involvement policy evaluation to design strategies for more effective parental involvement, and to revise, if necessary, the school’s parental involvement policy ● Support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, Parent-Teacher Association and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● Provide to each parent an individual student report about the performance of their child on the State assessment in at least mathematics and English language art, and at the end of each marking period. ● Provide each parent timely notice when their child has been assigned or has been taught for four (4) or more consecutive weeks by a teacher who is not highly qualified within the meaning of the term in section 200.56 of the Title I Final Regulations (67 Fed. Reg. 71710, December 2, 2002) ● Provide each parent timely notice information regarding the professional qualifications of the student's classroom teachers and paraprofessionals, as described in section 1111(h)(6)(A) ● Provide a Parent Coordinator who will serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend our school and will work to ensure that our school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office. ● Conduct parent workshops aimed at helping parents to understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report, and Annual Yearly Progress (AYP). ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events (e.g. IEP meetings and Parent Teacher Conferences) as needed; Our school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● Holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference. ● Hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year. ● Encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent-Teacher Association and Title I Parent Advisory Committee ● Supporting or hosting Family Day events ● Establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents ● Hosting events to support men asserting leadership in education for their children, grandparents and foster parents ● Encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; 7  ● Providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress ● Developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable, in the languages that parents can understand; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement Convene an annual Title I meeting at a time convenient for parents of participating children. All parents shall be invited and encouraged to attend. The school will provide information and explain the requirements of Title I and the rights of parents Activity Annual Title I Meeting letter to be sent home to parents Autodial via School Messenger reminding parents about Annual Title I Meeting Timeline Staff Responsible Tuesday, December 4, 2018 Parent Coordinator Friday, December 6, Monday, December 9, and Monday December 17, 2018 Parent Coordinator Annual Title I Meeting Wednesday, December 19, 2018 Principal, Parent coordinator, UFT Chapter Leader and PTA President Offer a flexible number of meetings and may provide, with Title I funds, transportation, child care, or home visits, as such services related to parental involvement: Activity Timeline Staff Responsible Principal, Parent Cordinator Orientation/Curriculum Night Tuesday, September 18, 2018 Subjects Teachers Parent Teacher Association (PTA) Meetings Every second Wednesday of each month at 6:30 PM School Leadership (SLT) Meetings Testing Workshop Every second Wednesday of each month at 5:30 PM Wednesday, January 18, 2019 at 6:30 PM All Staff Principal, Parent Coordinator All teachers are encouraged to attend Principal, Parent Cordinator and UFT Chapter Leader Principal The School of Integrated Learning Middle School 354 will take the following actions to: School-Parent Compact (SPC) 1. Involve parents in an organized, ongoing, and timely manner in the planning, review, and improvement of Title I programs. This should include the planning, review, and improvement of the school parental involvement policy, as well as the joint development of the school-wide program plan under section 1114 (b) (2): Activity Timeline Staff Responsible 8  Distribute Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) and School Parent Compact (SPC) templates to School Leadership Team (SLT). September School Leadership Team (SLT) meeting. SLT/parent involvement meeting to review draft October SLT meeting Approval and adoption of final draft November SLT meeting Presentation of Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) and School Parent Compact (SPC) to parent body November Parent Teacher Association meeting Parent Involvement meeting to review and revise plan April’s SLT and PTA meetings Present findings and proposed changes to PIP/SPC June PTA meeting Parent coordinator and UFT Chapter Leader, select teachers Parent coordinator, UFT Chapter Leader and PTA President, teachers Principal, Parent coordinator, UFT Chapter Leader and PTA President, select teachers Principal, Parent coordinator, UFT Chapter Leader and PTA President, select teachers Principal, Parent coordinator, UFT Chapter Leader and PTA President, select teachers Principal, Parent coordinator, UFT Chapter Leader and PTA President, select teachers Shared Responsibilities for High Student Academic Achievement 1118(d) I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum The School of Integrated Learning Middle School 354 will: 1. Provide high-quality curriculum and instruction in a supportive and effective learning environment that enables the participating children to meet New York State’s student academic achievement standards as follows: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); 2. Hold parent-teacher conferences during which this compact will be discussed as it relates to the individual child’s academic achievement. Conferences will be held (at least twice, annually): Staff will be available to meet with individual parents at parent teacher conferences on November 25, 2018 from 1:00 PM until 3:00 PM and 5:30 PM until 8:00 PM and on March 15, 2019 from 1:00 PM until 3:00 PM and 5:30 PM until 8:00 PM and Wednesday May 9 from 5:30 pm to 8 pm. 3. Provide parents with frequent reports on their children’s progress. Specifically, the school will provide reports as follows: Report cards will be sent home with students (backpacked) at the end of marking periods 2 and 4. For marking periods 1 and 3, report cards will be distributed at parent teacher conferences. 9  4. Provide parents reasonable access to staff. Specifically, staff will be available for consultation with parents as follows: All staff will submit a weekly appointment schedule to the main office indicating times and days when they are available to meet with parents. Parents will call the Parent Coordinator to set up their appointments to meet with their children’s teachers. Where practicable, they may also make the appointment directly with the teachers. Walk-ins will also be accommodated. 5. Provide parents opportunities to volunteer in their children’s school and to participate in their children’s class and observe classroom activities, as follows: Parents may choose from the list of volunteer opportunities posted in the Parent Coordinator’s office. With the principal’s or assistant principal’s permission, parents will be allowed to participate in their children’s class and observe classroom activities. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships BUILDING PARENTS’ CAPACITY FOR INVOLVEMENT 1118(e) In consultation with parents, The School of Integrated Learning, where practicable, aim to carry out the following discretionary activities as listed under section 1118(e) of the ESSA, in an effort to build parents’ capacity for involvement in the school and school system to support their children’s academic achievement: ● Involve parents in the development of training to improve the effectiveness of that training for teachers, principals, and other educators ● Provide necessary literacy training for parents from Title I, Part A funds, if the school district has exhausted all other reasonably available sources of funding for that training ● Pay reasonable and necessary expenses associated with parental involvement activities, including transportation and child care costs, to enable parents to participate in school-related meetings and training sessions ● Train parents to enhance the involvement of other parents ● Arrange school meetings at a variety of times or conduct in-home conferences between teachers or other educators who work directly with participating children ● Arrange meetings with parents who are unable to attend conferences at school to maximize parental involvement and participation in their children’s education ● Adopt and implement model approaches to improving parental involvement ● Establish a school parent advisory council to provide advice on all matters related to parental involvement in Title I, Part A programs ● Develop appropriate roles for community-based organizations and businesses, including faith-based organizations, in parental involvement activities I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 0  Provide parents of participating children: ● Timely information about the Title I programs ● Description and explanation of the curriculum at the school, the forms of academic assessment used to measure student progress, and the proficiency levels students are expected to meet ● Opportunities for regular meetings to formulate suggestions and to participate, as appropriate, in decisions relating to the education of their children Activity School Leadership (SLT) Meetings Math Night Literacy Night Parent Monthly Time line Every second Wednesday of each month at 5:30 PM Spring 2019 Spring 2019 First Monday of every month Staff Responsible Principal, Parent Coordinator and UFT Chapter Leader Math Teachers English and Social Studies Teachers Parent Coordinator Note: If the school-wide program plan under section 1114 (b)(2) is not satisfactory to the parents of participating children, the school will also submit the parents’ comments on the plan that will be available to the Community School District 17 Superintendent’s Office. I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents The School of Integrated Learning Middle School 354, will further celebrate and support student achievement and parental involvement by: ● recognizing and awarding deserving students with student of the month certificates ● recognizing and awarding deserving students with honor roll certificates each month ● Hosting academic awards ceremonies at the end of each marking period for student of the month and honor roll recipients. ● Hosting a dinner at the end of the school year (during June PTA meeting) for parents whose children are on the honor roll and those who have perfect attendance. Each parent will receive a certificate of commendation and a gift bag. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); 1  ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by promptly reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Advisory Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Students will share the responsibility to improve and support their academic achievement in the following ways: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ask for help when I need to ● Read at least 30 minutes every day outside of school time ● Give to my parents or the adult who is responsible for my welfare all notices and information received by me from my school every day ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● Always try my best to learn. 2  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? Strategies for extending learning time are grounded in the idea that providing additional time in school could boost academic achievement and help prevent the loss of academic skills during summer recess, which research suggests is a particular problem students. The most widely used and studied approaches to extend learning time include extending the hours in the school day, offering academically focused after-school programs, and providing students with summer learning opportunities. Our ELT takes place Wednesday-Friday from 2:20 pm to 4:25 p.m. with the support of Sports & Arts in Schools Foundation and other subcontracted activity specialists we are able to create an extended program that expands on day time instruction with subject clubs ( science club, dance ensemble, flag football, basketball, book club, leadership, community service projects. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the implementation of socially, culturally and emotionally positive behavior support strategies which will result in the increase of student engagement as well as an increase in the movement of students to a Least Restrictive Environment (LRE) CIS will research and implement school wide social and emotional programs to support students' emotional, social and academic development as evidenced in reduction in OORS reports. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? Plan to achieve Community School Goals and supporting the academic goals for our scholars by creating an Expanded learning time program that includes academic interventions and enrichment activities and is aligned with school day curriculum and expectations. Incorporating youth development strategies across academics, programs and services will support academic achievement as well as improve peer to peer and teacher to student interpersonal relationships. Health, medical, and social services and resources are available to the entire school body. Community Based Organizations and City Agencies are invited to school campus 3-5 times a year to table information as well as facilitate service specific workshops/ information sessions to families. These and other family centered programs give families access to educational, recreational, and occupational opportunities and programs. These programs are supported by our collaborative school governance structure which included a lead CBO partner and members of the School Leadership Team (SLT) Parent Teacher Association (PTA Community School Team (CST). Attendance support will be a collaborative effort between the CBO and school staff to focus on students that are categorized as Chronically Absent. Students will be paired with Attendance/ Success Mentors who will track attendance and create supports for students that are struggling with getting to school. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan 3 Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Counseling in Schools Target Population All students Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal Attendance supports Attendance/ Success Mentors will create and implement attendance improvement plans for students who were chronically absent the previous year resulting in 80% of the targeted students missing fewer days than the previous year(2017-18)reduction in OORS reports. Health and Wellness initiatives will be provided to members of our school community (students, teachers, staff, parents) to provide information, resources, and create a collaborative and supportive environment for all constituents. Research and implement school wide social emotional programs to support students emotional, social, and academic development as evidenced in reduction in OORS reports. For all families to be informed of school wide events/ initiatives to bolster parent engagement, as evidenced by communication in various media: Monthly Parent Newsletter, Updated school website, flyers and notices. Counseling in Schools All Students , Teachers, Parents Health & Wellness Students with Social Emotional Challenges Counseling in schools All Families Family Engagement 4  Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Grant Funded Health & Wellness  Licensed Master Level Social Worker, Licensed Masters Level Creative Arts Therapist, Master Level Social Work Intern (Hunter College) will provide group/ individual therapy to students referred by school community and/or parent /guardian.  Assist in monthly Mental Health initiatives and other school wide initiatives.  Facilitate/ Co Facilitate open activity groups to encourage inclusivity and healthy socialization (Knitting Club, Glamour Gals) Subcontract other agencies to provide professional development for school staff around social emotional learning, de-escalation, mental health and trauma, PBIS program, etc.  Extended Learning Time Work with administration, and SASF program director to coordinate Extended Learning Time schedule and activities   Provide financial coverage for DOE teachers during ELT time  Subcontract with teaching artist to provide enrichment activities during ELT time Attendance Support  Co-facilitate with administration and key stakeholders (Parent Coordinator, Attendance Teacher) weekly meetings monitoring students attendance.  Create and support incentive program for improved attendance and perfect attendance (trips, lunch, tangible prizes and certificates, bulletin board, etc.)  Pair students with Attendance Mentor to support students that are struggling with attendance  Use the data from the New Visions Data Sorter to inform Attendance Team as well as the Data Wise Team of attendance trends and create affective strategies to improve overall attendance. Family Engagement  Participate and support school leadership groups such as School Leadership Team (SLT), Parent Teacher Association (PTA), and Community School Team (CST). For all families to be informed of school wide events/ initiatives to bolster parent engagement Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 5  1. 2. 3. 4. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community based organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessments process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work.  Community School Director is a member of the following teams in which she offers support in implementation  Attendance Team  Data Wise Team  Building Response Team  Cabinet   Recruitment & Branding School Based Support Team   College Access for All Team Student Staff Support Team 2. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategies programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Extended Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. I’m completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community School Director alongside the program specialist, administration, and other partnering CBO director coordinate the Extended Learning Time activities based on student survey feedback administrated during the end of the 2018-19 school year as well as parent surveys.  survey feedback from family focus group session and Community School Forum of 2017-2018. This feedback allows both CBO’s to look into teaching artists that can provide those activities such as Chess, Drumming, Robotics, etc. 6   DOE teachers are also asked feedback on the ELT classes they facilitate to maximize on the enrichment activity they provide to students such as basketball, flag football, book club, science cub, etc.  7th graders are encouraged to attend sessions which prepare them for the specialized high school exam they will take in October of their 8th grade year.  8th graders are encouraged to attend regents prep sessions to prepare them for regent exams they will take at the end of the year. 1. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around renewal of their school, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work.   School community has established a School Leadership Team (SLT)as well as an executive board for our Parent Teacher Association (PTA) for the 2017-18 school year. These will be two major platforms for parents/ families to communicate their views, concerns, and ideas to the other school community stakeholders. In conjunction to the PTA meetings Community School Team (CST) items will be discussed and as a larger school community these two entities (which have overlapping members and perspectives) will continue the conversation on building a strong unified community school, inviting outer members of the community (CBO’s , NYPD, FDNY, Local business owners) to join us.  A Parent/ Family room is being located and prepared within the building to serve as a “family hub” where families can feel safe and comfortable. 2. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBO’s, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools- including the New Vision Data Sorter- and training will available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. Due to our school consolidation and no longer being considered a “renewal school” we have access to the New Visions Data Sorter but no longer receive support form New Visions in regards to how to maximize use of the tool. We have been able to depend on the support from our Program Manager through the Office of Community School to assist in utilizing the sorter for attendance meetings, open school night/ parent teacher conferences, data wise team meetings and during individual counseling or attendance mentor check-in’s. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students  Counseling in Schools (CIS) team will be fully entrenched in all school activities.  Office space will be provided for the members of Counseling in Schools as well as Sports and Arts in Schools Foundation (SASF) team members.  The Community School Director will sit in on the school cabinet and will be involved in the decision making process.  Counseling in Schools has three full time staff and one Masters Level Social Work student.  Counseling in Schools team members will support students and families who express the need of social and emotional supports. With signed consent students will be assigned 7   Counseling in Schools team members will be a part of the Attendance Team where they will monitor student attendance and provide interventions and incentives for students attendance improvements  Counseling in Schools team members will collaborate with parent coordinator to conduct parent workshops and set up task force groups to assess and determine parent/ family needs SASF Program Director will work along-side administration to coordinate after school enrichment program   CIS team will implement programs to support the “whole child”: art therapy, individual and small group therapy sessions, school wide mental health initiatives, guest speakers, creating supports for students and families in temporary housing. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program.  No adjustment is being made to the schools schedule.  Selecting a sub-contractor to facilitate professional developments around Social Emotional Leaning (SEL) to start the process to enriching our school community in supporting all students through a SEL lens Acquiring an online PBIS system to encourage students to earn points based on the principals of our PBIS system as well as give teachers/staff the means to both reward students and give anecdotes on students that are having struggles with acquiring points. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. September 2018 to August 2019. This is a year round program, including supports for summer school. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 8  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 17 School Name The School of Integrated Learning Borough Brooklyn School Number 354 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Monique Campbell Assistant Principal Betsie, Green Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Doreen Headley Teacher/Subject Area Cilka Mckenzie Teacher/Subject Area Sharon Paradis Mora-ELA Related-Service Provider Maxine Griffith Superintendent Clarence Ellis Coach School Counselor Maxine Griffith Parent Danielle Chang Parent Coordinator Elroy Cormack Field Support Center Staff Member Marie Bastien Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 9  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 263 Total number of ELLs 25 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 9.51% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The School of Integrated Learning (M.S. 354) has a register of 263 students. Of those registered 25 students or 9.51% are English language learners (ELLs) /Multilingual Learners (MLLs) - a small but significant part of our school population. This diverse group of ELLs speaks a language other than English at home. Five primary languages are represented including Arabic, French, Haitian Creole, Russian, and Spanish. The school leadership has a clear vision that includes high expectations for ELLs supported by a purposeful and systematic LAP plan of action leading to language development for all ELLs until they acquire academic proficiency. The process begins with the assessment process. To begin with, the NYSISTELL is used to determine English language proficiency status. The NYSISTELL is administered to first entrants or reentrance in accordance with the re-identification process. NYSISTELL is 0  administered to eligible students within the first ten days of initial enrollment to identify students who are entitled to bilingual and ENL programs. The Spanish LAB is administered to all newly arrived Spanish speaking students only at the time of enrollment; and the ALLD is also administered for Spanish-speaking students who may be SIFE. In addition, the DRA is administered to incoming sixth graders. Running records are administered and kept in folders. Also ELLs are administered all content area test including Science, Social Studies, and NYS Math assessment. ELLs are allowed a one-time exemption to the NYS ELA test which will be administered 12 months after enrollment. Once eligible ENL students takes the ELA test each spring which measures the Core Learning Leaning Standards. Another test, the New York State English as a Second Language Assessment Test (NYSESLAT) is annually administered to each ELL including ELL-SWDs in April - May. NYSESLAT is administer to determine continued entitlement of ELL services, progress in learning English, proficiency level, and number of units of ENL for the following year. Scores are analyzed to determine proficiency in the four literacy skills areas of listening, speaking, reading, and writing. The school testing coordinator is responsible for making sure that all periodic assessment test are administered according to test regulations. The testing coordinators is also responsible for providing timely benchmark results from DRA, MOSL, science and social studies test. Teacher teams are put in place to make the best use of data collected from all test mention above. Student test results are used by educators to assign students to appropriate classes and identify areas where the student needs extra help or more challenging material. Educators also examine school-wide results to identify broad instructional areas that require improvement. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Once information is gathered from the formative assessments mentioned above, educators along with ENL teachers create a schedule based upon students' levels. ellS participate in the Stand-Alone and the Integrated ENL program in accordance to Part 154 of the Commissioner's Regulations, CR-Part 154.CR-Part 154 contains standards for educational services provided to ELL. English language development level of all ELLs is considered in instructional decisions. To this end, ENL and content area teachers utilize the Common Core Initiative and the New Language Arts Progressions levels of each student to inform instruction for ELLs. The linguistic demands within the Progressions facilitate planning for integrating language as a teaching goal. Teachers plan for specific language that a unit in all content areas demands. unimportant details in a text. Teachers develop formative assessments according to levels. Knowing what students should be able to do at each level create benchmarks against which to measure progress. If, for example, a student should be able to integrate information from the text into a graphic organizer with the support of only a word bank, a formative assessment can include that scaffold and the teacher can recognize if the student needs more support, or if the student is ready to move to the next level. Teachers also develop rubrics to assess the ability of students to participate in partnership, small group or whole class discussions and measure progress over time. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? High-quality assessments are administered so that students, teachers, parents, and administrators can measure baseline, progress against shared expectations for student achievement, and identify areas of need. One of them is the ELA to assess student progress toward New York State standards in English language arts. Another assessment is the NYSESLAT, administered to ELLs to measure student progress in developing English language proficiency in speaking, reading, writing, and listening. Other content area assessment administered to ELLs are NYS Mathematics test assessing student progress toward New York State standards in mathematics. NYS Science Performance Test assesses students' progress toward New York State standards in science. Periodic Assessment is designed for ELLs and administered in Fall and Spring to provide teachers more relevant data about what students have learned. Teachers use these assessments to learn where students need more help and plan targeted instruction. NYCDOE does not use Periodic Assessment results to grade children or schools. 1  Data obtained from these assessments provide teachers with detailed information about students' strengths and needs in English language development and service as a resource to plan individualize and group instruction. Data is used to plan interventions for our ELLs and provide information about what each student knows. Teachers can target instruction to the learning needs of every child to help every student meet or exceed State Learning Standards. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? MS 354 provides professional development to all teachers and administrator which specifically addresses the needs of the ELL students. A minimum of 15% of the required professional development hours for all teachers as prescribed by CR Part 154 is dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for team teaching strategies and integrating language instruction for ELL students. Educators in their practice incorporate instruction that has demonstrated effectiveness for ELLs and differentiation to meet the students' diverse needs. When our ELLs demonstrate progress there is a need for more targeted and intensive academic support. Students scoring below specific levels of performance on the NYSESLAT receive additional support such as RTI and AIS. Evidence taken into consideration to provide the additional support include: the number of years receiving ENL instruction; English and home language literacy; content area and socio-emotional support of SIFE students; results of annual NYSESLAT ; parent or guardian request; sample of student work; and teachers recommendations. RTI resources for educators can be found at the DELLSS' website: http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/EducatorResources/RTI+Guide.htm 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Not Applicable 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Analyzes of MS 354 data from the NYSISTELL, NYSESLAT, RLAT, ELA, Math, and data tool data patterns reveal the following. The percentage of ELLs enrolled at this school is 9.51%. The average attendance of all students last school year was 92.54%. RLAT report indicate that two students are designated as SIFE students. A total of 4 students ELL-SWDs are receiving mandates IEP services in addition to ENL services. ATS data shows 28% of ELLs are long term ELLs. NYSESTILL administered to 8 first time entrants, in the school year 2017-2018, to determine ELL status, indicate that all 8 students are entitled to ENL services. Six students scored at the entering level, 1 student score at the transitioning level, and 1 at the expanding level of English proficiency. One new admit scored at the transitioning were tested with NYSESLAT to evaluate their language proficiency. Results indicate that 12 ELLs out of 25 scored at the entering level of language proficiency or about 48%. Data patterns results revealed that overall 88% of ELLs enrolled at MS 354 are the beginning and entering levels of proficiency as reveled bu LBR and NYSESLAT. One student tested out and scored at the commanding level of English development. A total of 10 ELLs scored at or below the 25th growth percentile and scored at Level 1 and Level 2 performance level in ELA. A total of 13 ELLs scored at or below the 25th growth percentile and scored at Level 1 and Level 2 performance level in Math. NYSESLAT scores in reading, writing, listening, and speaking modalities to determine continued entitlement and proficiency level for the school year 2017 revealed that 2 students scored at the entering proficiency level; 3 students scored at the emergent level; 5 students scored at the transitioning level; 5 students scored at the expanding level of English proficiency. 2  7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Educators engage in curriculum mapping and inquiry to determine the needs of all students. Teachers examine the New Language Arts Progressions and a balanced approach to literacy to provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development. This approach is being implemented to ensure that all ELLs in all subgroups including students with interrupted formal education SIFE, long-term English language learners and SWD meet the common core standards and competences set by local, state, and federal requirements under the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA). Parents have online access to Periodic Assessment as well as other state test results, attendance information, and course grades through Skedula. Students are given a user name and password so that they can log on to see test results and access instructional resources. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. M.S. 354 offers the Freestanding ENL program. Ms. Headley is the ENL teacher with full TESOL credentials. She teaches the ENL model that consists of both integrated and stand-alone model. She pushes into academic classes and pull-out from non-academic ones like music and physical education. For the stand- alone model, ELLs are brought together from various classes for English-acquisition-focused instruction. ENL is taught through the use of specific ENL instructional strategies emphasizing English language acquisition. The ENL program is designed to bridge the linguistic and academic gap limited English proficient students experience during the 5 levels of language progressions: Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding and Commanding stages (formerly 4 levels Beginning, Intermediate, Advanced and Proficient) of English language acquisition. All instruction is delivered in English using ENL methodologies designed to create a risk-free environment that stimulates authentic learning and promotes a safe supportive community within each classroom. Teacher collaboration, common planning, and conferencing ensure that content area instruction does not suffer as a result of the stand alone program. On the other hand, for the integrated model, the ENL teacher works in the mainstream classroom in collaboration with content area teachers to develop collaborative partnerships and support inclusive practices to accommodate the needs of diverse English language learners. The ENL teacher plans with mainstream teachers to ensure curriculum alignment. Grouping for instruction is based on mixed proficiency levels or heterogeneous grouping. All instruction is age and grade appropriate and follows Children First reforms that focus on strengthening ENL program models so that they are academically challenging. ENL instruction is also aligned with the NYSED New Language Arts Progressions (NLAP) aligned to the Common Core Learning Standard in every grade. For the stand-alone model, ELLs are brought together from various classes for ENL focused instruction. ENL is taught through the use of specific ENL instructional strategies emphasizing English language acquisition. The ENL program is designed to bridge the linguistic and academic gap limited English proficient students experience during the 5 levels of language progressions: Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding and Commanding stages (formerly 4 levels Beginning, Intermediate, Advanced and Proficient) of English language acquisition. All instruction is delivered in 3  English using ENL methodologies designed to create a risk-free environment that stimulates authentic learning and promotes a safe supportive community within each classroom. MS 354 as per the CR Part 154 requirements stand alone model, Ms. Headley our ENL teacher provides instruction to our ENL students in developing literacy and academic skills of ELLs in all subject areas. In our integrated model our ENL teacher and ELA teachers collaborate in the content areas in the delivery of instruction which builds language skills through all subjects. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The Freestanding ENL program implemented at M.S. 354 includes 2 instructional components of language arts instruction: English Language Arts (ELA) and English as a New Language (ENL). ELA instruction is provided by content area teachers. The ENL component is provided by the ESOL teacher. The instructional program provides classes for students at the 5 levels of language progressions Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding and Commanding levels of English language competency and literacy proficiency. Students at the Entering and Emerging receive ENL instruction for a total of 360 minutes or eight (8) mandated periods of ENL instruction per week, while the students at the Expanding level receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction per week, as mandated by CR-Part 154. The ENL teacher, holding an appropriate license for teaching English to Speakers of Other Languages, provides language development instruction in English. As per CR Part 154 content area instruction and ELA classes are delivered in English. Mainstream content teachers use ESL methodologies during instruction to provide a learning classroom environment in which LEP/ELL can effectively acquire academic content knowledge. When MS 354 reviews the NYSESLAT scores, ELL students are programmed in specific groups in order for them to receive the mandated amount of instruction outlined in CR Part 154. Our entering/beginning and emerging/transitioning ELL groups receive 360 minutes of ESL and our expanding and advance ELL groups receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction which utilizes ENL Methodologies as their learning is scaffolded using our curriculum units. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Language learning competency is based on academic content that is specific to each academic discipline where students are treated as historians and scientists. Consequently, ELLs are expected to work at the same level as all of the other students in the school. Curriculum options are the same for ELLs and non-ELLs. Teachers use strategies that are most applicable to the curriculum being taught. ENL teachers helps identify the strategies that are most appropriate for the concepts being taught. M.S. 354 teachers also use data to monitor ELL performance. In particular, they monitor ARIS to analyze NYSESLAT and ELA scores to identify when ELLs have improved. After examining the data, teachers try to figure out achievement gaps and identify the specific actions that can help students achieve most in these areas during class or after school programs. Content area instruction and ELA classes are delivered in English to students, who enter the New York City school system, with 4  limited English-speaking abilities. ELLs face the challenge of learning how to read, speak, write, and understand a new language while at the same time mastering grade-level content. Mainstream content teachers use ENL methodologies during instruction to provide a learning classroom environment in which LEP/ELL can effectively acquire academic content knowledge. Small flexible grouping is in place to address the needs of ELL subgroups. To help students progress in the ELL program we have in place practices such as scaffolding, modeling, bridging, schema building, contexualization, text representation and metacognition. Also, the ENL teacher uses words in the ELL student's native language to assist in vocabulary building on a one to one basis in the student's writing notebook. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Dual and Transitional models are not available at M.S. 354. The Freestanding ENL model is implemented and ELA, content area instruction is delivered in English as per CR Part 154. Flexible use of home language is permitted in the first two stages of language learning "Entering and Emerging", regardless of their grade level. Students at these 2 stages can use their home language in order to access the content. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Differentiated instruction is provided to all ELLs by all content area teachers and the ESOL teacher. All teachers use the New Language Arts Progressions (NLAP), formerly known as English as a Second Language Learning Standards, to ensure that ELLs meet the Common Core standards. For example, teacher use small group instruction, provide pre-identified key words, sentences, and phrases, words banks, and glossaries. Teachers also provide sentence starters, cloze-type procedures, graphic organizers, note taking skills, and allow students to use their home language in the early stages of language development. 6 a. SIFE: There are four SIFE ELLs at MS 354. SIFE students are given extra support at our school, particularly through push-in/pull-out. The focus for SIFE students is on developing their literacy skills and vocabulary development so that they will be able to function on their grade level and beyond. Additionally, SIFE students are provided with native language glossaries and English dictionaries and they encouraged to participate in after-school program so they can receive additional help by content area teachers. 6. b. Newcomers (Less than 3 years): There are twelve ELLs who are considered newcomers, having only received ESL for up to three years. Most of these students are required to take the State ELA exam in their second year. ELL students are exempt from taking the ELA if the student is attending school in the US, for the first time, for less than one year. Newcomers are given 8 periods of Freestanding ESL class and supported throughout their day by content area teachers who use NLAP and ESL methodologies in their lessons. The students are provided with native language materials as available in an effort to maintain and promote their native language proficiency. They also participate in the after-school program. 6. c. Long Term ELLs: There are four long term ELLs at MS 354. We are dedicated to the achievement of our long-term ELLs in their 4th to 6th years of ENL. They are expected to participate in all City and State exams. To help those ELLs , we offer extra AIS sessions using an intense program that focuses mainly on developing academic reading and writing, ELA and Math skills, plus test preparation assistance, plus after-school programs. ELL students receiving service for 4 to 6 years receive additional support during the day through push-in/pull-out. The focus for these students is on reading comprehension skills and writing. The content area teacher also provides additional support for these students during the day by pairing them with a proficient student. They, too, are encouraged to participate in after-school programs. 6. d. The focus on Long-term ELLs is in the area of reading comprehension and writing. Content area teachers provide additional support by providing them with English/Spanish dictionaries and thesauruses. They are also given support during the day through push-in/pull-out. They are often paired with an English speaking student or a native language student. They 5  are encouraged to attend after-school, and they will receive additional support in reading and writing. 6. e: Former ELLs: Testing accommodations will be provided to former ELLs. These students are entitled to time and a half on city and state assessments. For at least two years following the school year in which an ELL is exited from ELL status, former ELLs receive at least one half of one unit of study of English as a new language for 90 minutes per week as mandated in the CR Part 154.2. ELLs are appropriately evaluated in all 4 modalities of the NYSESLAT. Students are evaluated to see what level of command each student demonstrates in the reading, writing, listening, and speaking modalities. NYSESLAT modalities scores will promote instructional decisions as follows. The LAP team, the Spanish teacher and all content area teachers use the New Language Arts Progressions to scaffold instruction and ensure that ELLs meet the Common Core standards. To evaluate students, teachers utilize the NLAP performance indicators that address all four components of language: listening, speaking, reading, and writing. In addition, they monitor ELL student progress e.g. student work, formal and informal assessments test results, and systematically adjusts instructional planning based on a wide variety of evidence and data. Teachers use the NLAP to develop grade level instruction for students with varying levels of language proficiency and native language literacy development. ELA and content area teachers differentiate instruction for ELL in their classes. The NLAP have five levels of progressions: Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding. Teachers engage students of all literacy levels with grade-level texts. The amount of scaffolding provided by teachers is based the students' 3 literacy levels (1) Students with strong schooling in their home language, (2) Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE), and (3) heritage speakers. The NLAP are aligned with the idea that new language development most successfully happens when integrating content and language. The ESL teacher and content area teachers engage ELLs in authentic content-specific tasks from the very beginning of their exposure to the English language rather than working with simplified texts or lower level texts. Teachers provide appropriate scaffolding (e.g. pre-identified words, different graphic organizers, option to use home language, goggle, glossaries etc.) so that language learners can start developing the four modalities of language for academic purposes while at the same time they are developing basic communication skills. The stand-alone ENL program implemented at M.S. 354 includes 2 instructional components of language arts instruction: English Language Arts (ELA) and ENL progression. ELA instruction is provided by content area teachers. The ENL component is provided by the ENL teacher. The instructional program provides classes for students at the 5 levels of language progressions Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding and Commanding levels of English language competency and literacy proficiency. Students at the Entering and Emerging receive ENL instruction for a total of 360 minutes or eight (8) mandated periods of ENL instruction per week, while the students at the Expanding level receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction per week, as mandated by CR-Part 154. The Spanish teacher, provides language development instruction in English. As per CR Part 154 content area instruction and ELA classes are delivered in English. Mainstream content teachers use ENL methodologies during instruction to provide a learning classroom environment in which LEP/ELL can effectively acquire academic content knowledge. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELL-SWDSs with disabilities are ELLs who have an IEP determined by an IEP team. SWDs receive accommodations that apply to both ELLs and SWDs as appropriate.ELLs with disabilities are not exempt from the NYSESLAT. The New Language Arts Progressions (NLAP) and a balanced approach to literacy provides access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development. This approach is being implemented to ensure that all ELLs students in all subgroups including students with interrupted formal education (SIFE), long-term English language learners (LTE) and ELL-SWDs meet the common core standards and competences set by local, state, and federal requirements under the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA). 6  NLAP are research-based, flexible frameworks used by content area educators to guide their decisions about what scaffolds and supports are appropriate for students at different levels of language and literacy development relative to the Common Core-aligned ELA curricular units of instruction. NLAP suggest scaffolds and supports that teachers can use within the context of Common Core-aligned Language Arts instruction to be selected according to student level of new and home language arts progressions. Some strategies include: - pre-identified key words, sentences, and phrases, word banks or glossaries. - sentence starters, cloze-type procedures, graphic organizers (modeled, partially completed), and note making guides. - use partnership and small-group discussions. - allow students to meet the standard in new or home language, especially in the early stages. The instructional materials incorporate ENL and ELA standards. The primary purpose is to accelerate LEP/ELL students’ social and academic English language development in order that the students master the grade-level content knowledge. This interdisciplinary, standard-based approach enables the students to meet the performance standards and succeed on state, city, and national assessments. Content area teachers use various media. For example, Google Translator is used to provide students with class activities and homework in their native language. The ENL teacher demonstrates and instructs ELL students to uses the computer website Goolge interpreter to translate their daily class work from their native language into English. Utilizing technology is an important factor in ENL instruction because of the interactive, multi-sensory nature of language development computer software. In addition, content-specific vocabulary or task verbs are introduced, displayed, and emphasized throughout the school year. In planning instruction, all teachers include a language objective for ENL students in all units of study and lesson plans. Multi-language libraries are available to students in all content areas in languages such as Arabic, French, Haitian Creole, Russian-Yiddish, and Spanish. All students are exposed to technology. Laptops, teachers using Smartboards, and access to the internet are provided to accelerate language learning by ELLs. At M.S. 354, it is our goal to empower LEP/ELL students to achieve the NYS designated level of language progressions and to meet or exceed NYS, city, and national standards. To meet these goals, the students receive at least three years of academic subject area instruction using ENL methodology and instructional strategies. However, if a student does not met ENL requirement by passing the NYSITELL within three years, a time extension may be granted by the Commissioner for a period of up to six years of additional ENL instruction. Support is given to those students who achieve proficiency score on the NYSITELL to ensure a smooth transition into an English language mainstream program. Differentiated instruction is in place for all subgroups including SIFE, long-term English language learners and ELL-SWDs and SIFE. In addition, students in content area classes are usually paired with a native language student who assists them in their native language. In addition, where possible, content area teachers provide work in the ENL student's native language. Intensive small instruction enables the teacher to provide targeted instruction in order to focus on each student’s academic needs for ELL-SWDs and SIFE. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Teachers engage in curriculum mapping and inquiry to determine the needs of their ELL-SWDs within the least restrictive environment. ELL-SWDs are given support services from SETTS, CTT, and ENL instructors, who communicate with each other throughout the day about the progress of ELLs -SWDs. For scheduling purposes and to build a sense of community, ENL students tend to be placed in the same general education homeroom classes. Aside from ENL services, these students also receive AIS intervention in reading and writing to support their language acquisition development. 7  During the team meetings, teachers discuss the students' IEP and the NLAP appropriate strategies, grouping and scheduling that would best benefit these students. We also use data to assess our instruction and make decisions based on student's performance to determine the best instructional needs for our ELLs-SWDs. Accommodations for students with disabilities are provided to eligible students and documented on the student’s IEP or 504 plan, as appropriate. Examples of method of presentation are listed below: * Braille and large type * Visual magnification and auditory amplification * Test questions read aloud or signed (on appropriate tests) * Direction Read and reread aloud *Use of calculator, abacus or arithmetic tables (on appropriate tests) 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our intervention programs for ELLs include after-school and Saturday academies in ELA and Math, various social and academic clubs according to students' interests, AIS reading and writing interventions by several of our teachers, and all mandated specialized services such as speech and SETTS. They also receive AIS intervention in the subjects of Social Studies and Science. Strengthening ELLs academic skills through fun and interactive activities are in place at MS 354. ELLs participate in Ms. Roberts arts program. Roberts is a certified arts teacher. Her program offers ELLs activities in three arts disciplines: music, theater, and dance. The students have the opportunity to bring their arts to community based organizations and museums such as the Brooklyn Museum of Art. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? All ELLs are offered and encouraged to participate in after-school and Saturday academies in ELA and Math. They are also encouraged to participate in various social and academic clubs according to their interests and in various AIS reading and writing interventions provided by several of our teachers. SWD also receive all mandated specialized services such as speech and SETTS. We have been granted the Extended Learning Time Grant and Middle School Quality Initiative-MSQI. Therefore, we will be extending the school day for all students including ELL's. They will have opportunities to participate in the specific literacy programs used as consolidation for their language development. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Not Applicable 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELL students are provided with equal access to all the programs at MS 354. All ELLs and their parents are notified of, offered, and encouraged to take advantage of all the after-school programs and Saturday academies, all the social and academic clubs that we offer. In addition, they are encouraged to participate in the local library’s many programs as well as other community activities that exist near the school. All ELLs are provided with the following: • aligning ELL programs to English Language Arts (ELA) and mathematics Common Core curriculum and standards • building the capacity of all educators to deliver coherent programs and high-quality instruction, • implementing effective assessments, and • increasing parental participation in the education of ELLs. MS 354 does not meet the requirements for Title III a supplemental program provided with federal funds . 8  12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The instructional materials incorporate ENL and ELA standards. The primary purpose is to accelerate LEP/ELL students’ social and academic English language development in order that the students master the grade-level content knowledge. This interdisciplinary, standard-based approach enables the students to meet the performance standards and succeed on state, city, and national assessments. NLAP provides research-based, flexible frameworks that all language arts teachers can use to guide their decisions about what scaffolds and supports are appropriate for students at different levels of language and literacy development relative to the Common Core-aligned ELA curricular units of instruction. NLAP suggest scaffolds and supports that teachers can use within the context of Common Core-aligned Language Arts instruction to be selected according to student level of new and home language arts progressions. The following is a list of materials used: The ESOL and content area teachers differentiate instruction for students. The Progressions support teachers in understanding how to create content area scaffolds such as graphic organizers, sentence starters and rubrics that target the content area standard and match the students’ language ability in English or home language. Differentiated linguistic scaffolds that students require is facilitated to students across the 5 progression levels. At the entering level, students develop listening, reading, speaking and writing skills by focusing on key words in text, while students at the emerging level focus on key phrases and short sentences in English - the new language. Transitioning students need less explicit teaching of language and can replicate models, while expanding students can be supported with tools such as glossaries. Commanding students can be expected to work more independently. All students work within the same content area, but the teacher is able to create different supports for the students to access the content and the academic language that is integral to the content area. Content area teachers determine the specific scaffolds for ELA, Science, and Math by recognizing the precise way in which content should be broken down for students learning English. For instance, in Social Studies using a cause and effect graphic organizers is essential for understanding historical events. Sequencing becomes essential for understanding how a specific cycle works in science. Rubrics are used for assessing the reliability of a source. Summarizing is essential for distinguishing the main idea from unimportant details in text. All students use a variety of technology and access to the internet to accelerate language learning. Teachers facilitate content using smartboards. At M.S. 354, it is our goal to empower LEP/ELL students to achieve the NYS designated level of language progressions and to meet or exceed NYS, city, and national standards. To meet these goals, the students receive at least three years of academic subject area instruction using ENL methodology and instructional strategies. However, if a student does not met ENL requirement by passing the NYSASLAT within three years, a time extension may be granted by the Commissioner for a period of up to six years of additional ENL instruction. Support is given to those students who achieve proficiency score on the NYSASLAT to ensure a smooth transition into an English language mainstream program. ELLs also participate in the 37 ½ extended day small group instruction. Content area teachers use various media. For example, Google Translator is used to provide students with class activities and homework in their native language. In addition, content-specific vocabulary or task verbs are introduced, displayed, and emphasized throughout the school year. All teachers include a language objective for ENL students in all units of study and lesson plans. Multi-language libraries are available to students in all content areas in languages such as Arabic, French, Haitian Creole, Russian, and Spanish. Differentiated instruction is in place for all subgroups including SIFE, long-term English language learners (LTE) and ELLs with Disabilities. In addition, students in content area classes are usually paired with a native language student who assists them in their native language. In addition, where possible, content area teachers provide work in the ENL student's native language. Small group instruction enables the teacher to provide targeted instruction in order to focus on each student’s academic needs. Intensive small group instruction is provided for special education students and to Students with Interrupted Formal Education, SIFE to instruct middle school students. All laws and regulations for placement of LEP/ELL students, with possible handicapping conditions, are followed. 9  All of the classrooms in M.S. 354 are equipped with Smartboards for in-depth instruction and with computers for student work. In addition, there is a large, modern, well-functioning computer lab, where technology instruction is given to all students, including the ELLs. The instructional materials used for our ELLs are our curriculum units that include the four modalities for our ELL students. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is delivered in our Freestanding ENL model. Flexible use of student's home language is permitted and encourage in all classrooms in the first two stages of language learning which are the Entering and Emerging stages, regardless of their grade level. ELLs use their home language in order to access the content. Students at the Transitioning stage can make use of their home language when they have a need to. The ENL and content area teachers use bilingual books and references, dictionaries, and books on tape. Multi-lingual glossaries are offered to the other core subject teachers. And the peer-buddy system in and out of class is especially strong among our ELLs.: 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All services, materials, lessons, and peer-pairing correspond strictly to the age, grade and social level, and culture of our ELLs. The ESL teacher meets with the SETSS and classroom teachers during common planning times obtain feedback on individual strengths and needs of the ELL students. The ESL teacher is provide with weekly lesson plans of classroom teachers for all grade levels to be able to support and reinforce work done in the classroom. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Not Applicable 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). While many come at the beginning of the school year in September, many more flow in throughout the school year, sometimes registering as late as March. Any arrivals before registration, are referred to the many community-based programs available in the community for participation. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? The language other than English that is offered at MS 354 is Spanish. All seventh (7th) graders, including the ELLs, take it to satisfy the middle school foreign language requirement. In addition, the ESOL teacher offers a Spanish Luncheon Club that meets twice a week, at students’ requests. Many of the ELLs participate in this club which allows for social exchanges in a more relaxed atmosphere than a regular class. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not Applicable Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 0  The successful implementation of Language Allocation Policy depend on staff development, teacher qualification, and knowledge of the needs of English language learners. The focus of the ENL/ELL professional development is to present research based strategies designed to help LEP/ELL students meet the Common Core Standards. The professional development sessions encourage teachers to engage in reflection upon their pedagogical practice. Teachers and school personnel have an opportunity to share “best practices” and to learn from each other. The staff development sessions are designed to meet the mandate under Part CR154. Professional development and certification requirements • 15% total hours ELL-specific PD for All Teachers • 50% total hours ELL-specific PD for Bilingual Education and ENL teachers At the beginning of the school year MS 354 provides professional development for all staff members which includes all teachers, speech therapists, occupational/physical therapists, guidance counselors, paraprofessionals, aides and secretaries regarding differentiated instruction, planning for differentiated classroom and strategies for ELL students to developmental success. All teachers who provide instruction to LEP/ELL students and other school personnel including paraprofessional and the guidance counselor are encouraged to participate in high quality professional development that are needs driven and research-based. Our ENL teacher attends professional development workshops regularly and makes turnkey presentations to the other members of the faculty. The school is concentrating especially on Danielson’s Enhancing Professional Practices - A Framework for Teaching, both at our monthly professional development faculty sessions and in a professional study group that meets weekly. Other PD educators are encouraged to participate is PD that provides information on how to identify and address the academic achievement gaps that may affect ELL students’ performance. The training will explore the impact of second language acquisition, lack of quality prior instruction, socio-economic status, and students with interrupted formal education. The workshop will provide an evidence-based approach to appropriate school-based services before, or instead of, referring for a disability evaluation. Teachers and other school personnel attend PD provided by the DELLSS, NYCDoE, BOCES, or in-house PD to support ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards. Teachers are encourage to visit EngageNY.org for the latest in real-time professional learning tools and resources to support educators in reaching the State’s vision for a college- and career-ready education for ELLs students. The Department of English Language Learners and Student Support offers multiple resources including high quality professional development series, Common Core-aligned lesson samples and documents, and an ever-growing video library. School personnel interested can receive additional information on ELL-related professional development opportunities and educational resources should email DELLSS@schools.nyc.gov using a valid DOE email account. In house, professional development providers include the principal, the assistance principals, grade leaders, the ENL teacher, the special education inquiry group, and other staff members. PD focuses on sharing instructional strategies in order to continually increase the school’s capacity to work with the ELL population. Professional development at M. S. 354 is designed to promote high levels of academic achievement while integrating second language instruction. Teachers participate in collaborative discussions and curriculum development sessions. The focus of the collaboration includes best practice, current relevant research, and the incorporation of technology into every day instruction. The Department of English Language Learners and Student Support offers multiple resources including high quality 1  professional development series, Common Core-aligned lesson samples and documents, and an ever-growing video library. DOE employees that would like to receive additional information on ELL-related professional development opportunities and educational resources should emailDELLSS@schools.nyc.gov using a valid DOE email account. The Video Library Professional Development Offerings and Special Announcements Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE) Supporting ELLs' Literacy Development Native Language Arts Math Sample Units Nuts and Bolts of ELL-Specific Topics for New ELL Coordinators Video: 2017 Citywide Parent Conference Creating Pathways to College – Dream, Believe, Succeed! Language Allocation Policy Tool Kit 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Teachers new to NYCDoE in general education and special education classroom are mandated to receive 7½ and/or 10 hours, respectively, of professional development in ENL strategies. Our special education teachers have participated in Jose P. workshop organized by the Office of English Language Learners and District 17. They were trained in ENL methodologies and strategies. All teachers who have completed Jose P. training have received certificates. Records and signing sheets of all participants are securely kept in the main office filing cabinet. All teachers are trained in Understanding by Design, to create curriculum and lesson plans that meet the needs of ELL students and ensure that they have the opportunity to apply learning and skills that allow students to think critically. If any educator is lacking this training when they come to MS 354, they are sent to professional development workshops that focus on cultural sensitivity and diversity, ENL standards, ENL teaching techniques, and assessments. Proof of attendance at this training is kept by each teacher as well as in the individual teacher's file in the office of the school. : Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Communication with parents of ELLs is a priority at M.S. 354 school community and we foster a spirit of collaboration and support to ELL parents. We also encourage a sense of ownership over their child's academic success. Mr. Cormack maintains and provides information for parents to understand and engage in their child’s academic achievement. Parents and guardians are met individually at least once a year. This is addition to parent-teacher conference, initial parent 2  orientations, quarterly progress meetings, or other scheduled meetings. The purpose of this annual meeting is to inform parents about their child's language development in all content areas. Attendance records are collected and securely filed. Parents are informed by ENL and content area teachers of program goals, language development progress, the child’s English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. Such meeting is facilitated by having a qualified interpreter/translator in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands. Individual parent meetings are conducted in accordance with collective bargaining agreements. Record of attendance are filed using existing procedures. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. MS 354 encourages parent and community participation by notifying parents about meetings, workshops and special events via letters sent home, telephone calls, and fryers hung around the school. All material is written in English and Spanish, as well in the other home languages of our ELLs such as Arabic, French, French Creole, Russian, and Spanish when necessary. Translators are available at meetings or workshops and many key speakers are community-based personnel who are bilingual. Two parent orientations are conducted - one in the Fall and one prior to Spring, where parents of newly admitted ELLs are informed about the type of ENL programs available and inform them about their rights in choosing a program, state standards, assessments, and program requirements for Bilingual and Freestanding ENL programs as per CR- Part 154 Regulations. Information at the orientations is presented to parents in their native language to the greatest extent possible, as well as a movie showing and explaining all programs in most languages. However, as newly enrolled ELLs come in throughout the year, our ENL teacher and parent coordinator meet with them and inform them of their rights in regards to program selections. In addition, the school holds PTA monthly meetings with bilingual translation, award ceremonies and school concerts and plays that promote parent involvement. The school provides parents with opportunities for parents of ELLs/MLLs to attend workshops from community based organizations as well. The guidance counselor, Ms. Griffith, provides support for ELL students and their families is provided through high school workshops at school, along with Citywide and Borough fairs. The support provided by the guidance counselor helps the families of the ELLs with information regarding the transition to high school. These workshops and fairs are excellent opportunities for students and their families to gain a greater understanding of the high school admission process. Our guidance counselor push-ins into the classrooms to observe and present high school information to the students. In addition, our counselor meets individually with ELL students and their families to assist with the high school application process. On-going guidance and support is available to ELL students and their families throughout the year. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. The School of Integrate Learning LAP plan is a systematic plan developed with the input of community partnerships, administrators, teachers, parents, and other school personnel. The LAP support all ELLs language development until they have acquired proficiency. 3  4 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Monique Campbell, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 5  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: MS 354 School DBN: K17354 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Monique Campbell Title Principal Assistant Principal Elroy Cormack Parent Coordinator Danielle Hyacinthe ENL/Bilingual Teacher Danielle Chang Parent Sharon Paradis-Mora/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Takitha Lindsey /Math Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Maxine Griffith School Counselor Clarence Ellis Marie Bastien Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/30/18 6/30/18 6/30/18 6/30/18 6/30/18 6/30/18 6/30/18 6/30/18 6/30/18 6/30/18 6/31/18 6 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: 354 Superintendent: Clarence Ellis DBN: 17K354 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) Zoraida Cilka Grafals Mckenzie ESL/ENL Teacher Spanish Teacher Yes Yes Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Limited English speaking parents feel welcome from the moment they set foot in school. The parents or other persons in a parental relation to a student identified as an English Language Learner are notified in English and the language parents understand as per CR Part 154. A variety of welcome posters and signs are displayed. Parents are provided with translated surveys, informational documents, and notifications during registration, identification, and placement process. Parents’ primary language of preference is also assessed at registration. At enrollment, and to initiate the registration process, the English as a new language (ENL) teacher or a trained pedagogue, administers a Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS). Parents are required to complete the HLIS to determine both the child's home language and parents’ language preferences for written and oral 7  communication. On Part III of HLIS, parents have the opportunity to indicate the language of their preference. Parents indicate their language choice by answering two questions: 1) In what language would you like to receive written information from the school? 2) In what language would you prefer to communicate orally with school staff? Emergency contact cards are also available in different languages. Once parents indicate their language preference, the parent coordinator or the school secretary record the information obtained from the HILS in the Automate the Schools (ATS) system at our school. ATS is use to create and manage our ESL program and to keep track of our ELL students and parent language preferences. A brief overview of parents ATS reports such as UPPG provides school personnel a report with detailed parent and student information such as: parent and child first and last names, OSIS number and most importantly language preference. HLIS forms are filed in the student’s cumulative record. Currently, we provide on-site interpretation and translation services to limited English speaking parents in Mandarin, French, and French Creole, Japanese, and Spanish by certified teachers trained in confidentiality issues. Also, over-the-phone interpretation services is available under The Office for Family Engagement and Advocacy (OFEA), through the DOE’s Translation and Interpretation Unit available to parents free of charge in many languages. Parents at MS 354 speak Arabic, Bambara, French, Haitian Creole, Japanese, and Spanish. Parents can ask and have their questions answered in their preferred language. Parents may choose to rely on an adult friend, companion or relative for language and interpretation services. Other services are available at ELL Parent Hotline (800) 469-8224 or via web at nysparenthotline@nyu.edu . Another way in which MS 354 provides language access support to families and parent is by displaying multilingual welcome poster and translated signs throughout the building. A language identification guide for school staff and the “I speak…” card is also used by security desk personnel and staff members. The language access plan at MS 354 ensures that the provision for translation and interpretation services for limited English proficient (LEP) parents is in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-663. The State Education Department Website (translated into multiple languages): http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/parents-bill-rights-new-york-states-english-language-learnersmultilingual-learners-ell 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish English Japanese 20 259 6.87 89 0.26 21 257 1 7.22 88.32 0.26 8 1 2 5 3 1 French Haitian Creole Arabic Bambara .69 1.72 1.3 0.26 2 6 3 1 .69 2.06 1.3 0.26 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families 1) Mandated Parent Annual Meeting 1) October 2018 / annual meeting How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. DOE's translation from the internet (to inform parents of ELLs about child’s language development progress; NYSESLAT; services and program entitlement in school 2) ELL Parent Brochures 3) Parent Survey 2-4) Orientation DOE’s translation and interpretation unit 9  4) Program Selection Form 5) Entitlement Letter (Newly identified ELL's), 6) Program Placement Letter 7) Continued Entitlement 8) Non Entitlement/Transition Letter DOE's translation from the internet 5-8) Within 5 school days of ELL determination 9) Daily Use NYSED from the internet 9) Bilingual glossaries of Department of Education terminology and special education terms and definitions Dismissal Guidelines and Holiday, Early Dismissal School Calendar Schedule Monthly Staff members and Internet Other documents provided to each parent who require language assistance services are a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services. Translated versions at: http://schools.nyc.gov/RulesPolicies/ParentBillofRights/default.htm. A multilingual welcome poster and translated signage Registration DOE's translation from the internet An archive of pre-translated applications, forms, and templates Daily Use Internet Language Access A language identification guide for school staff and an “I speak…” card 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Curriculum night Annual Meeting Parent-teacher conference Three times a year 11/2718; 03/26/18; 5/16/18 interpretation service(s)? Staff members and subject area teachers who speak the different languages assist parents during face to face activities . Staff members and over the phone interpretation services for parents who speak languages not spoken by 0  any staff members such as Arabic, and Bambara. Father Take Your Child to School Annual Meeting (September) Parent Engagement School Leadership Team Community Education Council Weekly (Tuesdays 45 minutes) Weekly (Wednesdays) Monthly Mother's Day Tea Annual Celebration (May) Staff members and over the phone interpretation services for parents who speak languages not spoken by any staff members such as Arabic, and Bambara Staff members and over the phone interpretation services for parents who speak languages not spoken by any staff members such as Arabic, and Bambara. Staff members and over the phone interpretation services for parents who speak languages not spoken by any staff members such as Arabic, and Bambara. Staff members and over the phone interpretation services for parents who speak languages not spoken by any staff members such as Arabic, and Bambara. Annual Celebration (June) Father's Day Sip and Paint Annual Celebration Parent Award Night and Appreciation Dinner Prom and Graduation Annual Celebration Staff members and over the phone interpretation services for parents who speak languages not spoken by any staff members such as Arabic, and Bambara. Staff members and over the phone interpretation services for parents who speak languages not spoken by any staff members such as Arabic, and Bambara. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 1  In case of an emergency, staff members who speak the parent language contact the student's family (Languages spoken by staff members, Arabic, Japanese, Mandarin, Spanish, Creole and French). If Staff members are not available at the time, the over the phone interpretation services for parents is used to contact the parent to inform them about the emergency. The information as to how to use this service is posted in the main office for all staff members use. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. To ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor's Regulation A-663, the LAC coordinators turned key information from the LAC training received via workshop. The LAC coordinators provided staff members with information about languages of parents in our school and how to use the free parent interpretation services to reach these parents . A video as to how to use these services was also shown. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) In accordance with Section VII of the Chancellors Regulation A-663, the parent coordinator and the language access coordinator providing each parent whose primary language is a covered language and who require language assistance services with a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services. Translated versions of this document, in the covered languages, are available at http://schools.nyc.gov/RulesPolicies/ParentBillofRights/default.htm through the NYCDOE’s website. Parents are informed of the interpretation services available to them. An eye-catching school sign in each of the covered languages is displayed near the main office entrance indicating the availability of interpretation services in each of the covered languages. Translated signs, in the covered languages, are available at http://schools.nyc.gov/Offices/Translation/TipsandResources/Default.htm. The school’s safety plan contain procedures that ensure that parents in need of language access services are not prevented from reaching the school’s administrative offices solely due to language barriers. In the event that a limited proficient parent speaks a language that is neither English nor a covered language, the language access coordinator or the parent coordinator would obtain from the Translation and Interpretation Unit a translation into such language of the signage and forms required and shall post and provide such forms in accordance with Regulation A-663. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 2  The parent coordinator gather feedback from parents and conduct parent surveys. This is done during Parent Teacher Conference, PTA meetings and other parent meetings. Reflection and feedback sheets could also be filled out by parents in English or preferred home language after each session where these services are utilized. We also use face to face interviews when we conduct parent meetings. Teachers and other staff -guidance counsellor, AP, para -professional, etc assist in this process. 3 
