 School Name: 75K370 P.S. 370 Principal: SUSAN MILLER   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Jim Thorpe School 307500013370 K - 12 School Number (DBN): 75K370 3000 West 1 st Street Brooklyn NY 11224 718-372-3777 718-449-4082 Phone Number: Fax: Susan Miller SMiller60@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Susan Miller Margaret Negrelli Laura Fitz-Charles NA none none No CBO District Information Geographical District: 75 KetlerLouissaint Superintendent: 400 First Avenue New York NY 10010 Superintendent’s Office Address: KLouiss@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-802-1501 Phone Number: Brooklyn 2 FSC: 212-802-1678 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Kevin Lenahan Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 400 First Avenue New York NY 10010 KLenahan@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 212-802-1534 Phone Number: 212-802-1678 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Susan Miller Margaret Negrelli Laura Fitz-Charles Bryenth Kurban NA Jeffrey Franck Mariaelena Noto *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ CSA Member/ UFT Member/ UFT   Name Kathleen Cumberbatch Dawn Trotman Yvette Bognar KurtFitzCharles Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of K370, The Jim Thorpe School, is to foster the academic, social and individual growth of our students. Our goal is to prepare our students for their roles as responsible, compassionate and competent citizens in a complex world. K370 provides appropriate standards-based educational programs with related service supports. We collaborate with guidance and teaching staff to implement positive behavior interventions and supports to promote the development of the whole child. We work alongside families and community based organizations to prepare our students for the most appropriate environment.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. K370, The Jim Thorpe School is located on the periphery of Coney Island and Brighton Beach, a stone’s throw away from the Coney Island boardwalk and the Atlantic Ocean. We are a District 75 school serving students with severe and profound special needs, geographically located in Community School District 21. Our ninety seven-year-old building is flanked by the Trump Houses and Warbasse Housing Development. Just a short walk down Brighton Beach Avenue, you will find a thriving business community. This school serves a population of approximately 250 students from kindergarten through twelfth grade. K370 provides classes for special education youngsters with classifications of autism, intellectual disability, and emotional disturbance. Our class ratios are 6:1:1, 12:1:1, and 8:1:1. The main building houses our older children from grades six to twelve. We have one elementary school program (grades kindergarten to fifth) in a shared space, across the street in community school PS 100K. We have two additional elementary/intermediate programs housed in two other shared spaces, one in PS/IS 237K campus and the other is in the PS/IS 163K building. We have two inclusion high school programs, one located in New Utrecht High School and the other in William E. Grady Career and Technical Education High School. We have one work study program in the medical industry. The Veterans Administration Hospital provides our students with vocational training in the medical field from clerical work to janitorial services to patient transport. The school received the following ratings on our 2014-2015 Quality Review: 1.1 Proficient, 1.2 Proficient, 2.2 Proficient, 3.4 Well Developed and 4.2 Well Developed. As stated in the Quality Review report, our area of celebration is 3.4; “School leaders and staff consistently maintain a mutual culture for learning, which is aligned to the use of the Danielson’s Framework for Teaching that communicates high expectations for achievement with a clear vision towards shared responsibility with the entire school community.” In October 2013, the school opened its first bilingual Yiddish 12:1:1 class. During the 2016-2017 we opened a second bilingual Yiddish class for 6:1:1 students. The program currently has fourteen students in the middle school grades. The instruction in this program is 50% in English and 50% in Yiddish, thus making all students in the program bilingual in both languages. Our two Yiddish bilingual teacher and our three ENL teachers meet together to plan instruction with the use of additional supports that the English Language Learners receive through our Title III funding. Teacher teams meet to examine the program and design modified tasks to meet our students’ needs and ability levels. Harcourt Brace Science and Social Studies programs are used throughout the school with differentiation to provide scaffolding for all students. The Arts play a significant role in our school’s vision. This year we received a CASA grant through our council person, Chaim Deutsch. We have a partnership with Marquis Studios that will provide 15 classes of our students with 10 week programs in Dance and Music. We also submit multiple entries for the VSA competitions and PS Art competition each year. We continue to have “Bath Beach Buddies” with the general education students at PS/IS 163K where the 6th and 7th graders mentor our students, teaching our students social skills and conflict resolution. Also, we have been selected as a Collaborative School Community at our PS/IS 237 campus. All three schools within our learning community have ongoing collaborations to bring unification and integration throughout the school building. They have an annual school spirit week, a walk-a-thon for their community service project, and shared fundraising events. Our students also participate in the general education enrichment clusters where students are given a choice of activities (clubs) and attend once a week alongside their general education peers. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 0  During the 2016-2017 school year we began to implement the Attainment curriculum in both literacy and math for all of our alternately assessed students. During the 2017-2018 school year, we are focused on our work with alternate assessment students scoring level three on their Student Annual Needs Determination Inventory (SANDI) assessment. These four classes from grades 6 through 10 are piloting a new literature curriculum called Readtopia. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 370K continues to show strides in the same three areas of the elements of the Framework for Great Schools; Supportive Environment, Strong Family-Community Ties, and Trust. According to the 2016-2017 School Quality Guide, these areas have all continued to increase. Supportive Environment has made the greatest gains with a .38 increase. Trust has increased by .23 and Strong Family and Community Ties has increased by .13. As stated in our 2016-2017 CEP our focus area was Rigorous Instruction. In our 2016-2017 survey results we see a .20 increase in these responses. Teacher responses to their students ability to build on each other's ideas during class discussions and if the students use data or text references to support their ideas yielded only a 23 % positive response rate in the 2015-2016 survey results. The same two questions both showed an increase in the 2016-2017 survey results. Students' ability to build on each others' ideas during class discussion had a 34% positive response rate and students use of data or text references to support ideas had a 32% rate. Teachers have received professional development in specific strategies on how to expose and provide supports for students participating specifically in class discussion and use of data and text references. We plan to continue to work on this support structure for all our teachers. The key area of focus for 370K in the Framework for Great Schools is in Collaborative Teachers. According to our data, 28% of the teaching staff feel that their professional development experiences did not include opportunities to work productively with teachers from other schools. Feedback from our PPO suggested to develop strategies supporting our school's transition related goals and increase student self advocacy. We will be outreaching to other neighbouring high schools to visit and collaborate with their staff on expanding work programs and vocational resources for our students approaching adulthood to ensure their college and career readiness. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 75K370 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 01,02,03,04,05,06,09,10,11,12,SE Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 253 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 57 2 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance N/A N/A 33 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 82.0% % Attendance Rate 81.8% % Reduced Lunch 29.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 28.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 27.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0% 4% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A N/A N/A 27 89.2% 0.4% 99.6% 30.8% 12.3% 1.2% 6 0% 8.2 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In cross referencing the data from the 2017-18 and 2016-17 school year, we have noticed the following trends in relation to rigorous instruction. In reviewing the 2017-2018 midyear school survey, 28% of teachers reported to creating their own materials.   According to the 2016-17 School Quality Guide, 67% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that in planning  their last instructional unit for general/self-contained/literacy/science/social studies, they had the resources and tools they needed to include multiple opportunities for students to interact with complex grade-level text. In reviewing our 2017-18 midyear survey, 54% of teachers reported that the math curriculum meets the diverse needs of all students and 47% of teachers reported that the curriculum offers enough resources to help differentiate the instruction in Math. The teachers are utilizing the Attainment Math Curriculum.  Based on the 2014-15 Quality Review, we were proficient in (quality indicator 1.2 Pedagogy), “develop teacher pedagogy from a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best that is informed by the instructional shifts and Danielson Framework for Teaching, aligned to the curricula, engaging, and meets the needs of all learners so that all students produce meaningful work products.” The priority need for our school is to continue to improve the academics and instruction of all students in Grades (K-8). Teachers will continue to use the essential elements (ELA- EEs) to build a bridge from content standards to academic expectations for cognitively young students in literacy. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the K through 12th grade teachers will increase rigorous instruction through individually designed: tasks / projects / coursework / practice / related services, all students will make a 20% improvement in their current functional literacy level based on their preferred mode of communication and evidenced by data collection and classroom formative and summative assessments. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? During team meetings, teachers will collaborate to plan literary units of study from the curriculum to develop tasks connected to project based learning; teachers will incorporate these components into their planning. Teachers and APs Sept. 2018 through May 2019 Teachers and APs Maintain student datafolios as (1) a measurement of student learning and (2) eliciting evidence of student understanding. Establish and Implement on going instructional learning groups to meet students specific literacy needs. Teachers, All alternate assessment students Oct 2018 - May 2019 Teachers Ongoing review and analysis of student data: Data is reviewed by staff bi-monthly in team meetings, academic intervention services and modifications are suggested to meet students needs based on unit activities given. Teachers, alternate assessment All students Oct 2018 - May 2019 During Sit in Your Child's Seat Day, families may observe an literacy lessons with targeted goals for their children and have sample activities to bring home and conduct an activity at home. all parents Provide training for parents to practice literacy strategies and techniques to continue to reinforce learning at home. all parents Oct 2018, Jan 2019, & May 2019 November 2018 and March 2019 School Administrators, Coordinators, Lead Teachers, Assessment Team Leaders, Teacher teams All Classrooms Teachers and Staff, School Administrators All Classrooms Teachers and Staff, School Administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Hold Sit In Your Child's Seat day so that families may watch classroom lessons with targeted goals for their children and have lesson materials baggies to bring home and conduct the lesson at home. 4  Provide workshops for parents to experience lessons in ELA and Math and History/Science content to continue the work at home. Classrooms Teachers and Staff, School Administrators Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional learning opportunities, instructional walk-through, and classroom observations Common planning time for teachers for team meetings Development of pacing calendar -- curriculum map Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, students will make a 10% improvement in their current functional literacy based on their PMC as evidenced by data collection and formative assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) NYC DOE Literary Unit Plan template creation, Data Collection Template, Tasks/projects/Coursework, Formative and Summative assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? According to the 2017-2018 midyear survey, teachers were asked questions about the student academic performance in ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies, 92% of the teachers answered the survey. According to the 2016–17 school quality guide, 73% of teachers say they feel responsible that all students learn. As per our 2014-2015 quality review, (parent/guardians indicated that the teachers are in constant communication with them via the communication books, report cards, Individualized Education Program (IEP) meetings, parent-teacher conferences and email exchanges to share and discuss goal setting and the child’s progress. Teachers generate weekly and/or monthly newsletters to illustrate student work and successes, and highlights on the school’s curricula expectations.) According to the 2015-2016 school quality guide 94% of students agreed or strongly agreed that their teachers will always listen to students' ideas. As per the 2016-2017 survey results, 75% of students agreed or strongly agreed that their school offers a wide enough variety of programs, classes, and activities to keep them interested in school. Based on the 2016-17 school quality guide, 100% of students agreed or strongly agreed that their teachers will always listen to students' ideas. In addition, 100% of students responded that, in most or all of their classes, their teachers give them specific suggestions about how they can improve their work in class. According to the 2015-16 School Survey, 52% teachers reported teaching critical thinking skills to students, 52% teachers reported teaching students how to advocate for themselves, and 46% teachers reported teaching students the organizational skills needed to be prepared for their next level. According to the 2017-18 CEP the school developed structures in the classroom environment to provide students with supports to move towards a Least Restrictive Environment (LRE) by having 15% of the students independently navigate the school buildings to get to and from their related service programs, providing students with much independence as possible. This work will continue and be elaborated upon during the 2018-19 school year. During the 2017-18 IEP Review, some common trends and patterns that administrators noted were that students invitation to the IEP meeting was uploaded, student voice was evident within the IEP, and a level-1 vocational assessment was submitted from the parent, teacher, and student. During instructional rounds and observations were developed routines and structures within the lessons that would provide teachers to conference with their students to measure student learning and provide students choice within the assignments. These activities became a routine, in which teachers receive input from students' on instruction and assessments, (e.g. students are made aware of their strengths within the lesson and areas of improvement.) Our planning teams next steps is to have more student voice and input within the learning process and to engage students to be part of the IEP process. Teachers will work with together to provide professional development in understanding students roles and expectations of the IEP process. Part 2 – Annual Goal 6  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 30% of the student population will be involved in the IEP process and annual review, as evidenced by the SESIS attendance sheet, completed vocational assessments, student friendly IEPs and more student voice throughout the Individualized Education Program. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students will attend and/or participate in the IEP meeting (including a debriefing of the process) Students Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Teachers and Related Service providers Meet with staff to discuss students role and expectations all Sept. 2018 Administration of the meeting. teaching staff Establish and Implement tracking sheet of the number of students attending IEP meetings all Sept.2018- Administration and teachers teaching staff Oct. 2019 Hold unit meetings to review parts of the IEP where students voice can be implemented, (e.g. academic, physical needs, goals, etc.) all teaching staff Sept.2018- June 2019 Administration and teachers Invite parents to have their child attend annual reviews and be part of the IEP process at the conclusion of each meeting collect parent feedback on the meeting. all parents Oct 2018, Jan 2019, & May 2019 All Classrooms Teachers and Staff, School Administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Invite parents to have their child attend annual reviews and be part of the IEP process at the conclusion of each meeting collect parent feedback on the meeting, Sept 2018 - June 2019 All classroom teachers and Administrators, IEP Coordinator Related Service Providers, classroom and specialty teachers, school administrators 8  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Parents, Related Service Providers, Administrators, Teachers, Classroom Staff Common planning time, IEP meetings, Vocational Assessment, SESIS attendance page, student attendance page Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, upper elementary and middle school students will participate in the annual review process and attend IEP meetings, as evidenced by SESIS attendance sheets and student voice reflected throughout the IEP. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance sheets IEP student training schedules Completed students feedback forms Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2017-18 midyear survey 47% of the teachers reported to using Attainment Curriculum. Based on the 2016-17 School Quality Guide, 83% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the teachers at their school are actively trying to improve their teaching. Based on the 2015-16 School Survey, 79% of teachers agree or strongly agree that they modify instructional activities and materials to meet the developmental needs and learning interests of all students. In our 2017-18 midyear survey, 54.5% of the teachers reported that the curriculum meets their students diverse learning needs on the 2017-18 midyear survey. With this data we have identified our priority need for this element. In June 2018 teachers received professional learning on the Essential Elements. During the 2016-17 school year, teachers at the school collaborated to secure grant funds to implement technology within the classroom to enhance students' learning. Within the 2017-18 school year, technology was installed in each classroom at our high school. Teachers' also collected data around students’ IEP goals and end of unit assessments and developed strategies as a team to provide training on how to operate the technology in the classroom and access functions on the Smartboard to help with instruction. At one of our elementary schools, teachers' reviewed their 2017-18 F&P results and identified a need to focus their attention on increasing the reading levels of emerging and expanding by one more level in order to deepen their ELA skills in reading comprehension, supporting details, and main idea. We will continue with this line of work and inquiry to address our students reading and math skills to close their leaning gap and to provide students with equal access to the general education standards as their typically developing peers without disabilities. In reviewing of the 2016-17 School Quality Guide, 100% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that at their school teachers talk with one another about instruction. In addition, 85%of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that at their school the principal/school leader, teachers, and staff collaborate to make the school run effectively. Our work for the 2018-19 school year is to ensure more teachers collaboration between grade levels and cross curricular connections in order to designing and supplement curricula with resources to meet students’ academic needs. Teachers will become active participants and model effective teaching practices in order to strengthen instruction schoolwide using the . Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all classroom teachers will collaborate between grade levels, and design and implement tasks which delineate all four Essential Element linkage level progressions: Initial, Proximal, Distal, and Target focusing on Math Essential Elements MC3.1 (understand and use measurement principles and units of measure) and MC3.2 (represent and interpret data displays) where students demonstrate increasingly complex understanding of measurement, data, 0  and analytic procedure, as evidenced by data collection and classroom formative and summative assessments using the Equals Math Curriculum. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Develop and revise monthly as needed the common planning scope and sequence (Including identification of problem of practice, various check-points for debriefing inter visitation process) All classroom teachers Sept 2018 Administration and Instructional/assessment Core Team Train teachers on the Equals Math and refresher on Essential Elements All classroom teachers Sept 2018 - Oct 2018 Administration Develop protocols for teacher collaboration (including devising plans for supports and next steps) All classroom staff Jan 2019 Administration Teacher Leaders Instructional/assessment Core Team Analyze impact of inter visitation and feedback cycle Develop a schedule for teacher collaboration during each unit of study. All classroom staff Sept 2018 - Administration June 2019 All classroom staff Sept 2018 - Jun 2019 Administration Teacher Leaders Invite parents to all unit culminating demonstrations at the conclusion of each instructional unit and collecting feedback on the experience. all parents Oct 2018, Jan 2019, & May 2019 All Classrooms Teachers and Staff, School Administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. All classroom teachers and staff, School Administrators Common Planning Team- Professional Learning Community (PLC) 2  September 2018 - June 2019 Families will be invited to culminating demonstrations at the conclusion of each unit of study and provide feedback on the experience. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Instructional Team, Instructional Leaders, Administrators, Classroom Teachers Scheduling: Common planning time, PLC meeting times, Inter-visitations Schedules Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all classroom teachers will have completed at least two rounds of teacher collaboration on the Essential Element linkage levels as evidenced by meeting logs, completed feedback forms., and formative and summative assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Meeting sign in sheets and minutes Collaborative low inference notes Completed Feedback forms Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. During the 2017-18 end of year conference, a majority of the teachers reported that they feel supported by the administration and will like continued ongoing administrative support for the 2018-19 school year. According to the 2016–17 school quality guide, 82% of teachers say that the principal communicates a clear vision for the school. As per our 2014-2015 quality review, (through creative scheduling, the school was able to arrange common planning periods at the beginning of each day for all teachers throughout the organization. During these common planning periods, school leaders conducted professional development for staff to reinforce Webb’s matrix with Danielson’s FfT with a focus on questioning techniques.) According to the 2015-2016 school survey, 49% of teachers reported that the principal and school leaders at this school participates in instructional planning with teams and 61% of the teachers reported that the principal sets clear expectations for teachers about implementing what they have learned in professional development. Some common trends and patterns administrators noted in component 4e (professional responsibilities) in the frameworks for teaching: teachers are encouraged to attend professional development and take leadership roles to turnkey the information that they acquired at the workshop to their colleagues. Some of these workshops include Using AAC- technology, sensory strategies, behavior data collection, GRTL, transition services, Using the SmartBoard, IEP Writing, and Essential Elements. According to the 2016-2017 school quality guide, 47% of teachers reported that they have a moderate to great deal of influence over school policy in the area of selecting instructional materials used in classrooms and 82% of teachers reported that they have a moderate to great deal of influence over school policy in the area of developing instructional materials. Our school leadership team's next steps is to increase staff morale and improve employee retention in order to support the instructional goal of the school. In addition, we will continue to expand opportunities for staff to take part in the decision-making process through the creation of various leadership teams. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders will develop and maintain a more cohesive, transparent environment with the goal to increase morale, improve employee retention and nurture a school community rich with open and productive communication on all levels and with all stakeholders as evidenced by an average 5% increase in New York School Survey Report areas: Teacher-Principal Trust, Program Coherence and Instructional Leadership. 4  5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Sept 12 - Oct 21 2018 Teachers, Administrators Establish a second School Leadership Team: This team will consist of various stakeholders to represent the voices from all sites and participate in the planning and making of school decisions. The members of this team will plan and coordinate schoolwide events. This team will meet weekly to plan. Select Site Liaisons for School-wide Initiatives: A liaison from each site will be selected for school-wide initiatives such as Sit In Your Child Seat Day and/or Spirit week. Liaisons will be responsible for representing the staff and students at the site, communicate a consistent message, and coordinate the efforts of the initiative. Teachers Oct 2018 - Mar 2019 Teachers, Administrators Form a Rethink team with liaisons from each site and led by an administrator to address the professional needs of paraprofessionals at each site. all school staff Varies depending on Need Teachers - Administrators Develop pacing calendar for the roll-out of initiatives Teachers Oct 2018 - All Teachers - APs Conduct feedback surveys May 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Invite parent input on the decision making process, attend to parent concerns or questions that they may have, invite parents to be part of the schools decision making process to help improve the learning environment Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Classrooms Teachers and Staff, School Administrators Principal, Assistant Principals, Lead Teachers and Paraprofessionals, Human Resources: Instructional Leaders (TLP candidates), Administrators, Per Session for after school meetings, Paraprofessionals 6  Scheduling: Common planning time, PLC meeting times Technology: Computers, SmartBoard, Laptops Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School Leadership Team and Parent Association, Planning teams, Inquiry team meetings, Weekly professional learning communities Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, liaisons, teams, and representatives will assemble to assess progress and at least 65% respond positively to the teacher-principal trust on a 370K generated survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher survey results Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In triangulating the 2014-2015 Quality Review and the 2016–17 School Quality Snapshot we have noticed the following trends in collaborating and forming partnerships with parents to meet the needs of the student: Based on the 2014-2015 Quality Review (Quality Indicator 3.4 High Expectations), Transition Coordinator and teachers have completed a “Career Plan” for every student within the organization that incorporates career interests, student goals and parental input to assist families in understanding the path to college and career readiness. Parents shared that the school conducts a yearly Transition/Career Day that focuses on career exploration and next steps. School has business partnership with Goodwill and VA for student participation with work-site experience. In the 2016–17 School Quality Snapshot 97% of parents believe the school offers activities and services to improve life outcomes for their child. 26% of the parents completed the survey. According to the 2017-2018 midyear school survey 27.1% teachers reported to offering information about matching a student with an MSC during IEP meetings. Based on this data our priority need is to increase parental involvement and partnerships and ensure that all parents are aware of the resources available to support them and their children. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will develop a more collaborative partnership with families and community organizations in order to educate parents with children in Grades (K-12) about transition, guardianship, job placement, housing opportunities, higher education opportunities, as measured by 30% parent attendance in workshops and training with community organizations and agencies for parents who have children and young adults (5-21 years of age). 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? During school wide events parents will receive information about from the parent association about upcoming events and activities offered to parents. All parents During parent-teacher conferences a survey completion station will be available to all parents for completing survey. In addition, surveys will given to parents for completion via technological devices All parents Sep – Nov Nov- May as needed Jan 2019 - Feb 2019 Parents and Parent support team Classroom Teachers, Administrators Disseminating copies of notices and information to families in both their native language and English to attend school functions, translating more communications will be available at parent training workshops. All Parents Sep.-Jun. Parent Coordinator Interpretation & Translation Unit All Parents Oct. 2018, Jan. , 2019, & May, 2019 All Classrooms Teachers and Staff, School Administrators Fall and Spring concert events so families may attend school-wide performances with celebrations for their children and digital videos will be made available for students to bring home and share with their parents. Culminating demonstrations so families may watch end of unit activities with targeted skills for their children and parents will receive lesson resources to bring home and replicate the activity with their children at home. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Hold Sit In Your Child's Seat day so that families may watch classroom lessons with targeted goals for their children and have lesson materials baggies to bring home and conduct the lesson at home. Oct 23rd 2018, Jan 16th 2019, & May 9th 2019 9  Parent Coordinator Interpretation &Parent Support Team All parents with children in Grades (K-12) in will be invited to attend parent training workshops, district and/or school events, planning meetings, IEP meetings. Community organizations will be invited in to hold information sessions. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent engagement meetings will be scheduled monthly in terms of workshops and informational sessions, sit in your child’s seat will happen three in the year, with translation services provided Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 85% of our students in grades 10 and above will have completed a vocational assessment. Information sent home to families for students who are eligible for Medicaid services. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent event sign-in attendance sheets data collection Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students who score 4 or more reading levels below grade level based on Fountas and Pinnell reading levels Mathematics 2017NYS Math level 1 Go Math pre & post unit assessments error analysis Go Math beginning & end of year data performance task assessments Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) SMILE Structured Methods In Language Education (SMILE) multi-sensory communication development. This program engages children as they progress through basic attending, phonemic awareness and sound-letter knowledge to the use of language in a descriptive and conversational manner. Wilsons tactile system to address students needs who struggle with phonemic awareness – letter – sound recognition. Go Math games drill exercises aimed primarily at building fact and operation skills. Brain Pop Web based, individualized, program to increase students’ math fluency and builds Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day One to One and Small group instruction - 5x weekly – during the literacy block Small group instruction * 4x weekly * during the math block During the school day 1  Science Social Studies 2017NYS ELA level 2 NYSESLAT item analysis Classroom performance data At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) PPT referral Teacher concerns Parent concerns Student attendance data Classroom performance data upon processing and method Grade 4 NYS Science level 1 Classroom performance data Small group - 2 X weekly – During the school day Small group - 2 X weekly – During the school day Small group - daily – During the school day Morning classroom routines 5X week iOpeners Real life photography which connects nonfiction reading to nonfiction writing with activities that prepares students for life. Rosen Readers Primary Source documents and information with graphic images connecting nonfiction reading and writing at lower read ability levels. Advisory / Violence Prevention Students develop skills to control anger and express their feelings through words either written or oral. GRTL Low impact yoga calming techniques Life Space Crisis Intervention Students develop new coping skills and self regulation techniques Violence Prevention workshops Students learn and practice social skills, such as empathy, emotion management, problem solving, and cooperation Therapeutic Crisis Intervention Students develop new coping skills, decision making and self 2  regulating techniques . 3  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Not a Title 1 School Not a Title 1 School Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 3 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 4  No Funds Received 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. No Funds Received 5  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. NA 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). NA Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA 6  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). NA 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. NA 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 0 0 0 0 0 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 7  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 8  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 370, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students PS 370 will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; 9  ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  Title I Priority and Focus Schools and the parents of students served in the Title I program must jointly agree upon the use of these additional funds to support increased parent engagement/education to enable parents to effectively support their child’s learning.  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 0   host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help;    Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by:  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 370, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; 1  ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; 2  Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 1. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; 3  ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 4  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 5  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: This year 370K received Title III funding and will be running a Title III program at our main site serving students in grades 6-12. Similarly to last year, we will continue to support our newly growing population of ELLs of junior high students in their transition to high school, as these students are particularly vulnerable in terms of cultural and social integration, with many of them, specifically in this age group, being recent arrivals to the country. This year we are continuing to implement the Transitional Bilingual Education program (TBE) for our Yiddish speaking students that currently serves students in grades 7-9 in 2 classes, in a 12:1:1 and 6:1:1 student to staff ratio. The program is headed by our state certified Bilingual Special Ed Teachers, who are fluent in students' native language and in English. This program incorporates Yiddish Native Language Arts in every content area throughout the school day, and is consistent with the students' home cultural norms and expectations in the areas of ADL. Many of our Yiddish TBE students expressed continued interest in the Title III after school program and both parents and staff report that these students greatly benefit from the cultural/social integration with other students during after school activities, as a way to branch out of their own cultural group within which they otherwise spend most of their time at school and at home. Our triple Yiddish Bilingual/ Special Ed/ TESOL certified teacher will continue working with the Yiddish speaking ELLs as well as ELLs from other language/culture groups and will focus on American sports. The Sports After School Program will allow our ELLs to be exposed to the many different sports that are played here in America. They will learn about baseball, basketball, football, soccer and tennis. Students will learn the vocabulary that is associated with these games, the rules of the game and will actually play the game as a whole group. Teacher will incorporate adapted books, picture books and videos to show students the game, the players who play the game and a brief history of the game. Students will be able to partake in discussions related to the games, talk about what sports they already know from their home country and ask questions about parts of the sport that they are not familiar with. Physical play of the game will be done in the yard of the school where students can act out the game and play the game as they have learned in class. The Language Experience Approach, Total Physical Response and Natural Approach methods will be used allowing students not just to learn the words and vocabulary of the game, but actually to experience the sport itself and “live” the lesson. By the end of the program, students should be familiar with the vocabulary of the games, know how to identify and discuss parts of the game and recognize the equipment that is used specifically for each game. Other methods will include Social Stories language learning approach, as students learn individual roles of players on a team. Technology will be incorporated to demonstrate the games virtually to students. Through all these activities they will have many opportunities for schematic language learning and will expand their skills and vocabulary in English as well as their native language through Listening, Speaking, Reading and Writing activities. The grade levels of students served in the Sports After School Program group will be determined on a first come first served basis once the Title III eligibility and invitation letters are 6  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information sent out to parents in the fall, and we know how many students from which grades are interested in attending the program. We will do our best to accommodate as many of the interested students as possible, while preserving the maximum allowed grade range of 3 contiguous grades in the group, as well as student to staff ratio mandated by each interested student's IEP. This group will include up to 12 ELL students in a 12:1:1 IEP ratio and will run twice a week every week on Tuesdays and Thursdays (excluding holidays and half-days) for 2 hours after school (from 3:05pm until 5:05pm) for a total of 12 sessions, starting in March and ending in May to allow for outdoor sport activities in warmer weather. Our other dually certified ENL /Special Ed teacher will head the other Title III after school group for 12 semi-weekly sessions from November to January, and will focus on cooking and socialization skills while incorporating culturally based and appropriate schemas into language learning. This program will serve up to 12 students (in a 12:1:1 student to staff ratio) who need additional support in basic daily functioning and communication related to it. The lessons for this after school group will revolve around building self sufficiency in the kitchen and at home in general, peer socialization, arts and crafts, intercultural awareness, bringing students' home culture into the classroom, while expanding their familiarity proficiency with American culture and the English language. Through examination and practice of American and international cuisine, social games, culturally based activities of daily living (ADLs), and special celebrations, students will increase their understanding and appreciation of their own cultures and that of the American people in the multicultural hub of New York City. The dominant methodology of this program will be the Language Experience Approach, where through cooking and other kitchen related ADLs, as well as social games, and arts and crafts, students will have many opportunities for schematic language learning and will expand their skills and vocabulary in English as well as their native language through Listening, Speaking, Reading and Writing related to program themes. Multiple entry points will be provided to students to accommodate their different abilities, through visual, auditory, kinesthetic, tactile, and other sensory based input. Sights, sounds, smells, and feelings inspired by being in the kitchen and engaging in social activities with peers will be discussed and built upon to ensure student engagement and understanding of the curriculum, as well as language development. The grade levels of students served in this group will be determined on a first come first served basis once the Title III eligibility and invitation letters are sent out to parents in the fall, and we know how many students from which grades are interested in attending the program. We will do our best to accommodate as many of the interested students as possible, while preserving the maximum allowed grade range of 3 contiguous grades in the group, as well as student to staff ratio mandated by each interested student's IEP. The group will include up to 12 ELL students in a 12:1:1 IEP ratio and will run twice every week on Tuesdays and Thursdays for 2 hours after school (from 3:05pm until 5:05pm) excluding holidays and half-days, for a total of 12 sessions, starting in November and ending in January. We feel that with the school day curriculum focusing on academic rigor and striving to mirror general education Common Core Standards in academic content areas, it is important to provide our Special Needs students with additional support in the areas of native and American cultural awareness, social integration, daily living, self care, and self-sufficiency by building language, literacy, and communication skills into important familiar schemas and introducing and developing new appropriate cultural schemas. The rationale for choosing the Language Experience Approach and focusing on naturally occurring and culturally based activities of daily living, such as cooking, and sports to build language, communication, and literacy skills in our ELLs is consistent with the research of Warren and Kaiser (1988) who describe the milieu approach as the use of natural environments and daily routines to teach effective communication in children with disabilities. They specifically promote teaching within conversational contexts and teaching within natural communicative situations. (Cook, Tessier, and Klein, 2000) 7  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information To support academic learning, physical and social activities in the after school programs will go alongside reading and writing tasks, such as reading recipes during cooking activities, listening to, following, and giving instructions during physical activities/sports, preparing and reciting speeches for cultural social and team celebrations, writing and following directions during community excursions, games, common household tasks, reading and writing shopping lists for trips to the grocery stores, creating and following how-to instructions for a cooking activity, a game plan, or a household task such as doing the dishes or setting and clearing the table, etc. The program will supplement the ELLs’ daily curriculum by providing an additional opportunity for these students to participate in fun naturally occurring communicative activities and socially interactive events in a language-focused supportive environment. Sensory integration techniques and materials will be used to motivate learning, addressing the specific needs of these students with special needs. Students are identified for these after-school programs based on student and parent interest, student's ELL status, and their performance below grade level in ELA and all content areas. We feel that participating in the after school program and improving their English language skills will have a positive impact on their academic and social performance. This instructional program is aligned with state ENL New Language Progressions, ELA, and content area Common Core Standards. The aim of the program is to enrich and reinforce instruction provided during the school day by helping students improve their literacy and comprehension skills, vocabulary, and overall language proficiency, achieve higher standards and succeed in the classroom, all while increasing self sufficiency and social interaction skills through learning and practicing team sports and/or cooking/socialization activities. The Bilingual and ENL teachers, with the help of bilingual paraprofessionals, will differentiate instruction according to grade level, languages, cognitive and physical abilities and special needs of the students. All of our ELL students have a diagnosis of Intellectual Disability, Down Syndrome, or Autism and are in Alternate Assessment. Their languages include Yiddish, Spanish, Chinese, Russian, Albanian, Uzbek, Arabic, and Haitian Creole and others. Due to the need for continuing native language support in all content areas and school programs as well as social interactions with other students during group activities, 2 bilingual paraprofessionals, fluent in the participants’ native languages, will work in the after school program. The after school program will be offered to all of our ELLs in grades 6-12, and students will be placed into the program on a first come first served basis as long as space is available, keeping in mind the mandated student-to-staff ratio for these students. English will be the language of instruction, with native language support from bilingual staff incorporated into each lesson. Our triple certified TESOL/ Yiddish bilingual/ special education teacher, and our dually certified ENL/ special education teacher, with the help of 2 bilingual paraprofessionals each fluent in different native languages of the students on each group (for additional native language support as explained above) will run twice a week Tuesday and Thursday, 2-hour after school program from 3:05pm until 5:05pm for up to 12 ELL students in a 12:1:1 student-to-staff ratio for each group. The first group's (cooking and social activities) program will run on Tuesdays and Thursdays (except for holidays and half-days) starting in November and ending in January, for a total of 12 sessions. The second group's (sports) program will run on Tuesdays and Thursdays (except for holidays and half-days) starting in March and ending in May, for a total of 12 sessions. In addition to the above mentioned staff, because our Title III program will take place after school, an administrator is needed and will be present to ensure that all compliance and instructional requirements are met. Because the Tuesday's administrator’s regular school day hours are 7:45am to 3:45 pm, an additional 1.25 hours (rounded up to the nearest penny for each session) (from 3:50pm until 5:05pm) for each Tuesday session (12 total) will be covered by Title III funding. Because the Thursday's administrator’s regular school day hours are 8:00am 8  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information to 4:00 pm, an additional 1 hour (from 4:05pm until 5:05pm) for each Thursday session (13 total) will be covered by Title III funding. Our school secretary will dedicate 10 hours of per session (before or after regular school hours) to administrative support for the after school program for ordering supplies, arranging bussing, creating and distributing parent letters, communication with families, etc. This year we will continue integrating technology into language learning. We will use I-Pads and interactive language learning applications with active teacher participation to enhance the receptive and expressive language skills of the students. Students with limited verbal abilities will be able to use the I-Pad as an assistive communication device to participate in group discussions using various speech output applications. Higher functioning students will also be instructed in basic keyboarding and Internet research skills. Technology can motivate students in their efforts to improve English proficiency skills and acquire content area knowledge. Students with disabilities are also receptive to learning experiences that involve the computer, and an increased motivation leads to increased language use, and result in improved proficiency and higher standards in content area learning. Computer-assisted Language Learning (CALL) has been used for language teaching since the 1960’s. Research (Blake, 1987; Chun & Brandl 1992; Egbert & Petrie, 2003) and practice suggest that the use of technology in the classroom is effective if used appropriately. Students’ motivation is a key factor in this effectiveness but there are other contributing factors including; the individualization of learning, the presentation of materials in a non-linear sequence, an access to a variety of authentic materials, immediate feedback, and the fact that students are learning by doing things themselves. Consistent with this year's Title III theme, to help our ELLs explore different cuisines and cooking methods online, learn about practical household skills from how-to videos, witness baseball and other sporting events across the world, we will use technology to enable students to view materials they may not have access to in the classroom or their immediate surroundings at home. Computer and I-Pad activities will make a virtual excursion experience come alive for students through online activities, and through video, and audio interactive lessons. As we will also focus on socialization activities such as games, puzzles, arts and crafts for the students in our cooking program, we will obtain necessary materials to support these activities with Title III OTPS funds. Finally, we will continue our subscription to Reading A-Z and Raz kids, to support student learning on the topics of sports, cooking, friendship, arts and crafts, special celebrations. There are many printable and online books available through this great educational resource, which students can use both during the after school program and at home, when reviewing what they learned with their families. Reading A-Z provides printable hands on resources that facilitate student discussions on the various topics, allow them to practice writing on the topics, and give parents access to the materials at home. We will extend the subscription to several classrooms of our ELL students so that they may continue to be supported with supplementary reading materials and related activities during the school day and at home in addition to their regular classroom curriculum. Materials we plan to purchase this year include sports related supplies, books, sensory integration items for students with extra sensory needs, easy recipe book, kitchen and cooking supplies, games, puzzles, arts and crafts supplies, and a number of gift cards (not to exceed $40 in total) for the parent raffle (to encourage parent participation in program sessions). Selection of materials is based on the following principles: • Support themes covered in the program with visual, auditory and sensory access points for all students. • Assist students in experiential learning based on the topics of the program 9  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information • Provide supplemental support for ELLs to develop language proficiency and succeed in the content areas. • Provide enriching, engaging, and motivating experience for English Language Learners and their parents. • Demonstrate appreciation of the students’ culture of origin, and use primary language as a resource by including culturally relevant books, bilingual books and dictionaries, and books in the primary languages. • Ensure that ELLs can use these materials independently. • Provide a welcoming, stress-free environment where ELLs can have a sense of belonging and ownership, and can develop a positive self-concept while improving language proficiency and content knowledge. • Provide a variety of materials that are age-appropriate, appropriate for the cognitive development and language proficiency of the student and are of high-interest. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Our PD component this year will be a series of 3 workshops that will include a book study/ curriculum development on the topics of using sports and cooking in Special Education and, since those are our areas our focus for Title III program and we are targeting kids in middle and high school, who are getting closer to transitioning out of school into the next phase of life where they will need to be more self sufficient and work in teams with others. Our 2 current ENL/Bilingual teachers, bilingual after school paras and an administrator will meet 3 times throughout the year for 2 hours each session. (paraprofessionals will meet 2 times per year- once during their after school 12 session stretch stretch, and once for the final PD at the end of the year) During these PD sessions we will read/discuss/create curriculum for both parts of our after school program that can later be carried over into working will ELLs during the school day with other staff involved. We will explore literature and develop curriculum on sports in District 75. We will also explore and develop kitchen and social skills curriculum using various relevant resource sharing, including the Attainment Life Skills Curricula Series Home Cooking Book. There are also many relevant websites, including the Reading A-Z and Raz Kids online curriculum, recommended at previous District 75 PD sessions that provide educators with visual and easily adaptable resource packs, including online and printable books, visual communication boards on similar topics, lesson plans, etc that we will explore and utilize to collaboratively create curriculum on the topics. We will collaborate as a team to brainstorm curriculum ideas and create unit/lesson plans using these resources. Participants will include 2 current ENL/Bilingual teachers who will be running the after school program, 4 bilingual paras who work in the after school program and one administrator. Because we are splitting the after school program into two separate 12-session stretches this year, the 2 bilingual paras for each session will be invited to attend the PD meeting that occurs during that session, as it will be most relevant to their work with the students, as well 0  Part C: Professional Development as the final end of year PD. However the 2 teachers and 1 administrator will meet during all 3 PD workshops, as they will be expected to carry over the developed curriculum into their further work with ELLs whom they serve on a regular basis during the school day. Thus there will be one workshop during each of the 12- session stretch, and one culminating workshop at the end of the year, during which all staff, student and parent program evaluation feedback from each program stretch will be discussed and incorporated into planning for next year's programming. There will be no single PD provider as all participants will contribute equally to the ongoing discussion, collaborative team planning, and creative curriculum development, incorporating the information from the book study and online resources explored. Because all participants work at the main site during the school day, the team will gather at our main site after school, on 3 separate occasions: one in November or December, one in March or April, and one in May or June. The PD sessions will start 3:05, and will go for 2 hours until 5:05 to allow for adequate discussion, application and collaborative curriculum planning time. Topics to be covered will include exploring the following questions: - What resources are available for educators of ELLs with special needs on the topics of socialization through sports and cooking? - How can we support each other and other staff members in our school working will ELLs with special needs on helping them develop good team work and household self-sufficiency skills? - How can we design a better curriculum and/or classroom activities on the topic of sports, cooking, socialization, arts and crafts, friendship, teamwork, physical health and social behaviors to address the specific needs of ELLs with special needs? -What is the role of the bilingual support staff in these activities in order to maximize student comprehension, participation, and learning? -How can technology be incorporated most effectively to increase student language and literacy development for ELLs with special needs? There will be no single PD provider as all participants will contribute equally to the ongoing discussion, research, and creative curriculum development. Thus, all the participants will be paid the trainer PD rate as they will all be doing part of the research, brainstorming, curriculum mapping, and presentation. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: This year our Parent Involvement component will be in the form an open invitation to parents to come and participate in any of the after school sessions with their children. Parents will be welcomed and made part of any activities that the students participate in, and instruction on how to carry over themes and activities from the after school into the home environment will be given to parents. Parents will be instructed on the use of Reading A-Z and Raz Kids at home to review theme appropriate books and worksheets with their kids and further facilitate relevant vocabulary development for the whole family outside of the school setting. 1  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities To increase parent participation and motivate them to come this year we will hold several raffles where gift cards in nominal amounts will be used as prizes to be won by parents who show up to the after school sessions. These raffles will be announced in the beginning of each program stretch via the invitation letters in the parents' preferred language of communication. Refreshments for parents will also be provided at each session to encourage parent participation. The rationale for inviting parents into the sessions this year instead of holding separate meetings is that this way parents can see their children in action, and practice engaging them in the activities alongside with after school program staff. This provides parents with maximum exposure and hands on experience in working with their children in a culturally integrated social/academic setting that can be continued in the home setting. Parents will be notified in the form of letters in the family's preferred language of communication upon the child's enrolment into the after school program. They will be informed that they can attend any and all sessions, either for the entire duration or partial time. Our school bilingual staff will assist with translation and interpretation. As program staff is guiding parents in the after school activities with their children, they will cover the following topics: -What the students are learning in the after school programs and why this is important. -What parents can do at home to support their children in acquiring this content and language knowledge. -Concrete activities to try at home. -ENL and TEACCH strategies parents can incorporate into their daily routines to support language and communication skills development in English and their native language. -Information sharing between parents and staff on relevant resources and opportunities in the community. -Useful technology resources to try with children at home, such as online educational programs like Reading A-Z and Raz Kids, helpful language learning websites and applications. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $9805.96  Per session  Per diem Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Teacher Per-Session: Weekly after school program: 1 Bilingual/ENL teachers x 24 sessions x 2 hours x $60.65 = $ 2911.20 Professional Development: 2 ENL/Bilingual teachers x 2 hour x 3 sessions x $60.65 = $ 727.80 Total Teacher Per-Session: 2911.20+$ 727.80=$3639.00 Paraprofessional Per-Session: Weekly after school program: 2 bilingual paraprofessionals x 24 2  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. sessions x 2 hours x $34.73 =$ 3334.08 Professional Development: 4 paraprofessionals x 2 hours x 2 session each x $34.73= $555.68 Total Paraprofessional Per-Session: $ 3334.08+$555.68=$3889.76 Supervisor Per-Session: Weekly after school program : 1 supervisor x 12 sessions x 1.25 hours x $63.45 =$ 951.75 Weekly after school program : 1 supervisor x 12 sessions x 1 hour x $63.45= $ 761.40 Professional Development: 1 supervisor x 1 hour x 3 sessions x $63.45 =$ 190.35 Total Supervisor Per-Session: $951.75+$761.40+$190.35=$1903.50 School Secretary Per-Session: 10 hours for after school admin )ordering, bussing, parent communication, etc. 10 x $37.37= $373.70 NONE Black and Decker Flash Pro Thermal Laminator, Measures 17" W x 7-2/5" D x "3 H, 9" Throat, Laminates 3 mil & 5 mil Pouches, Black $159.70 3 Velcro Sticky Back Self-Adhesive Hook and Loop Fastener Tape with Dispenser, 3/4 in X 15 ft, White $61.71 Fellowes Laminating Pouch, Letter, 5 mil Thickness, Pack of 200 $62.24 Purchased services  High quality staff None $1590.24 and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. 3  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Do a Dot Art Washable Applicator Paint Marker, Sponge Tip, Assorted Regular Colors, Set of 6 $12.06 Do a Dot Art Washable Applicator Paint Marker, Sponge Tip, Assorted Brilliant Colors, Set of 6 $13.86 Do a Dot Art Washable Art Marker, Sponge Tip, Assorted Shimmer Colors, Set of 5 $13.86 2 Expo Low Odor Chisel Tip Dry-Erase Markers, Assorted, 12/Pack $15.28 Creative Inspire T10 Speaker System $45.88 Lexmark CX510 Extra High Yield, 801XK Black Return Program Toner Cartridge-80C1XK0 (8k Pages) $69.81 Lexmark CX510 Extra High Yield, 801XY Yellow Return Program Toner Cartridge-80C1XY0 (4k Pages) $63.54 Lexmark CX510 Extra High Yield, 801XM Magenta Return Program Toner Cartridge-80C1XM0 (4k Pages)$63.54 Lexmark CX510 Extra High Yield, 801XC Cyan Return Program Toner Cartridge-80C1XC0 (4k Pages) $63.54 SONIC-6567-Black $188.14 Childcraft Mobile Open Shelving Unit / Bookcase - 48"W x 14-1/2"D x 36"H $245.96 iPad mini 4 Wi-Fi 128GB Space Gray $367.00 Cooking Ingredients $144.12 Raz-Kids and Reading A-Z Online Literacy Programs $679.80 NONE Educational Software (Object Code 199) $679.80 Travel Other NONE 4 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Parent Involvement: Gift cards for parent participation motivating raffles $40 Refreshments for parents $250 $12366.00 TOTAL $290 $12366.00 5  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 75 School Name The Jim Thorpe School Borough Brooklyn School Number 370 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Susan Miller Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Olga Maryamchik Marsela Divija Teacher/Subject Area Oren Finkel/Yiddish TBE Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Superintendent Assistant Principal Hope Smith Coach School Counselor Parent Cathy Wolf Parent Coordinator Vincente Wilson Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 2 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 252 6 Total number of ELLs 74 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 29.37%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Yiddish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 4 0 3 0 2 0 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 370K uses various assessments throughout the school year to assess the early literacy of our ELLs, such as the NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, NYSAA, Fountas and Pinnell Benchmarking System, SANDI, as well as regular assessments incorporated into the curriculum for each content area (i.e. Trophies, Go Math assessments). The data obtained from these assessments is used regularly to plan instruction by classroom and ENL teachers. In addition, our ENL teachers create and administer their own periodic assessments, which are specifically adapted for our special needs population, that parallels the skills measured by the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT to track student progress from the beginning to the end of the year. The results of these assessments are then used to guide instruction, inform and parallel their IEP goals, and highlight strengths and weaknesses for each individual student in the following months. Data shows that our ELL students generally struggle in reading comprehension and writing more than in speaking or listening. We use these findings to ensure that we target those areas in our instruction across all subject areas, and especially in ENL service delivery. 7  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Our school's ENL team coordinates with the administration and content area teachers to evaluate the validity and reliability of the assessment procedures. The ENL teachers meet with other staff members on a regular basis to discuss the outcomes of the assessments and to design strategies to address the areas of need for every student. Various Professional Development trainings are offered in our schools as well as in D75, to keep the ENL teachers up-to-date with the new city and state wide testing and standards requirements. Our school constantly revises assessment data in order to redesign or modify instructional strategies. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Our Freestanding ENL and our Bilingual programs will be evaluated based on students’ performance on the NYSESLAT as well as general achievement in the students’ regular classrooms, including NYSAA results, and each child's specific IEP goals, as 100% of our population have IEPs and the vast majority are Alternately Assessed. Our main goal is to improve their communication and literacy skills for effective daily living. Specific areas of strength and weakness are identified annually by the IEP team, and ENL instruction is geared toward addressing areas of need. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We have designed student-specific strategies that cater to the needs of every individual student. We have scheduled one-to-one instruction, small group instruction as well as real life situation instruction. Our students are practicing their communication skills when they go on shopping trips, socialization when they go to parks and restaurants as well as citizenship when they practice following the law and rules of NYC during activities such as crossing the streets, recycling and respecting others inside and outside of the school. These activities aim to help the students meet their linguistic and academic goals and at the same time prepare them for transition to the community. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Most of our ELL students would naturally fall in the tiers 2 and 3 of RTI framework, as they all have special needs and require individual one-on-one attention within our program. We thus do our best to group kids in the smallest groups possible when providing Integrated and Stand Alone ENL services. Students who are struggling the most, as is reflected by their assessment scores and academic/behavioral performance reports, are at times serviced individually, if/when the ENL teacher's schedule permits. When working within a class for Integrated ENL, our ENL teachers work with students in small groups with the assistance of paraprofessionals and classroom teachers to insure each student receive the maximum individualized attention and support. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Our school's 2017 NYSESLAT results indicate that most of our 74 ELL students are at the Entering (27) and/or Emerging (25) proficiency levels. 16 are at the Transitioning Level, and 6 are at the Expanding level. When analyzing the test score data we also keep in mind that the students' NYSESLAT scores tend to reflect their individual cognitive and developmental levels, in addition to their English language proficiency. Thus we see that non-verbal autistic students tend to do better on listening than on speaking, while kids with Down Syndrome are better speakers and listeners than readers or writers.We also keep in mind the fact that the NYSESLAT gets progressively more difficult to master for kids with severe cognitive and developmental delays as the grade bands of the test progress. Thus kids who scored at higher proficiency levels in earlier grades often score at a lower proficiency level when they are tested in a higher grade band. We continue to strive to address the needs of our ELLs not only by targeting their areas of weakness as reflected by NYSESLAT scores, but also according to their IEP goals. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Every week our ENL staff has common planning time with classroom and cluster teachers and cohort meetings where student data and performance is reviewed and discussed. Curriculum is planned both by classroom and ENL teachers based on what is talked about in these meetings. Whenever new assessment data becomes available, it is brought to the attention of all staff 8  serving the students involved, and program adjustments are made accordingly to target areas of struggle for students. Our school has ensured that all students receive the required minutes of ENL service in integrated and stand-alone sessions. While all sessions are designed to meet the needs of every student, integrated sessions focus more on academic content while stand-alone sessions target the linguistic needs of the students. We have designed our instruction in order to help the students meet the state standards as well as to help them improve their academic performance. We target the areas of need as well as help the students retain the skills that they have already mastered. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Currently PS 370 offers ENL services in a Freestanding ENL program across all of our sites. We currently have 3 TESOL certified teachers on staff (one teaching a self-contained classroom at our main site, and two traveling across sites to service ELLs in collaboration with various classroom teachers. Our Self-Contained ENL class at the main has 6:1:1 students in grade 9, and is taught by our soon to be dually certified in Special Ed and TESOL ENL teacher, who will be responsible for delivering both integrated and stand alone ENL services. The students served in the self-contained ENL class will remain with their class throughout the day. They are currently all in grade 9, however if necessary can be grouped within 3 contiguous grades, heterogeneously, according to their IEP ratios. Of our two traveling freestanding ENL teachers one is dually certified in Special Ed and TESOL and one certified in TESOL and will work either independently, or in collaboration with Special Ed certified classroom teachers, when required, to deliver Integrated and Stand Alone ENL services to the remainder of our ELLs (outside of the self- contained ENL class) in small groups across our numerous sites. These groups will be compiled within 3 contiguous grades, heterogeneously, and in compliance with the mandated IEP ratios. While we try to maximize the number of kids in the ELL groups for ENL service delivery to ensure that the mandated minutes of ENL services are provided as per CR Part 154.2, we also keep in mind the students' individual cognitive, developmental, behavioral and academic needs. Students receive the maximum number of allowable ENL minutes given the staffing and geographical constraints of our multi-sited school organization. b. TBE program. If applicable. We currently have 2 certified Bilingual Yiddish special education teachers who teach the Bilingual Yiddish classes at the main site. One is a triple certified Special Ed, Bilingual, TESOL teacher, who will teach the Bilingual Yiddish 12:1:1 class and deliver integrated and stand alone ENL minutes, bilingual instruction, Home Language Arts, and Core Content Areas with language support to his students. Our other Bilingual Special Ed certified teacher will teach the Bilingual Yiddish 6:1:1 class. All ENL minutes will be provided by the TESOL certified teacher, and HLA and Bilingual subjects will be provided by either Bilingual Special Ed certified teacher to their corresponding classes. The students in both Bilingual classes are in grades 7-8, most of them are at the Entering English proficiency level, and require a lot of one-on-one support for both academic and daily functioning tasks. c. DL program. If applicable. We currently do not have a dual language program in our school. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 9  In order to ensure the provision of the mandated number of the instructional minutes, our ELL teachers follow the State requirements outlined in CR Part 154 when grouping the ELL students and scheduling them for ENL services: Stand-alone ENL - Our ENL teachers will pull students out of their classrooms in small groups to provide stand alone ENL minutes. Integrated ENL - Our TESOL certified ENL teachers will work either independently, or in collaboration with Special Ed certified classroom teachers, when required, to deliver Integrated ENL services. When the ENL teachers are collaborating with other classroom teachers students will be seen within their regular classrooms during ELA and/or other content area periods, and other students may be brought in to join the class to maximize ENL group size within the limits of the IEP ratio. In our TBE Yiddish program - our triple certified Special Ed, Bilingual, TESOL teacher, will teach the Bilingual Yiddish 12:1:1 class and deliver integrated and stand alone ENL minutes, English Language Arts (ELA), Home Language Arts (HLA), and Core Content Areas with language support. Our other Bilingual Special Ed certified teacher, will teach ELA and HLA to the Bilingual Yiddish 6:1:1 class. She will collaborate with the TESOL certified teacher, to ensure that her students' ENL minutes are delivered as mandated by CR Part 154.2. Students receive the maximum number of allowable ENL minutes given the staffing and geographical constraints of our multi-sited school organization. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. For students at our main site in grades 6-12 served by our dually certified (TESOL and Special Ed) teacher who is qualified to deliver both the integrated and the stand alone ENL minutes, core content will be taught during integrated ENL times using ENL strategies and methodologies. To enrich language development and make content comprehensible, the Freestanding, as well as the dually certified classroom ENL teachers collaborate not only with other classroom teachers, but other cluster teachers, as well as all service providers. PS 370 schedules common prep periods in order for the ENL teachers and other staff to have planning time together and be able to coordinate their instruction (plan lessons, create materials, plan assessments, evaluate lessons.) The ENL teacher also communicates regularly with all other teachers and related service providers at regularly scheduled team meetings and through e-mail to ensure collaboration on building and implementing effective ELL-appropriate teaching strategies, materials and curriculum among the entire school team. Every lesson is aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards and includes activities in Listening, Speaking, Reading and Writing that help students develop target skills appropriate to their developmental and academic level. Our 12:1:1 teachers integrate research based ENL strategies into content areas, while our students in our 6:1:1 focus on communication needs, following directions, life skills, matching and sequencing. The ENL teacher and classroom teachers of ELL students use Total Physical Response, modeling, multi-sensory approaches, scaffolding techniques such as picture and native language supports, graphic organizers, semantic webs, KWL charts, as well as various appropriate assistive technology such as augmentative communication devices to foster and aid oral language development. Math is studied and made accessible using visuals and manipulatives to teach basic skills such as counting, addition, subtraction, division, multiplication, etc. Explicit ELA includes the workshop model for Balanced Literacy modified by using symbols and augmentative communication devices. The ENL teacher uses interactive technology such as literacy and numeracy building websites (Reading A-Z, Raz Kids, Starfall.com, Funbrain.com, etc) to foster student engagement and comprehension of ELA and Math content. Other content support includes such materials as the New York ELLs Bilingual Common Core curriculum series and a classroom library that supports literacy for ELLs. In our Bilingual Yiddish class, similar strategies and common core based curriculum is used, however instruction is delivered in Yiddish as well as English. Due to the severe cognitive delays of the student population in these classes and their significant Yiddish language dominance, 40% of instruction is delivered in the native language, and 60% in English, even though this is the third year of the program. Students are evaluated in both Yiddish and English throughout the year with school wide periodic assessments, classroom task rubrics, and standardized state assessments such as the NYSESLAT. All subject areas, including English and Home Language Arts (HLA), math, science and social studies are taught in both English and the native language throughout the week, with a 60%-40% language ratio. The math curriculum focuses on basic life skills, related mathematical abilities, while Social Studies covers social skills, culture, history, and ADL skills. Science involves many hands on projects to 0  introduce and expose students to scientific concepts important to their daily lives and becoming self-sufficient. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Our ENL program focuses primarily on developing English skills and students are thus evaluated in English. However many of our students in Alternate Placement have a Bilingual Paraprofessional working with them in the classroom, who is able to assist them with native language support during all classroom activities, including during evaluations of academic skills that can be assessed using the student's native language. The ENL teachers also provide classroom teachers with language assistance for students who need it during assessment. Thus a student who responds primarily to Russian may be evaluated by her classroom teacher in math skills while the ENL teacher serves as the interpreter explaining directions and expectations to the student. Students in our Bilingual Yiddish class are evaluated in their native language on a regular basis throughout each curriculum unit in all core subjects, as well as during school-wide periodic assessments. Our certified bilingual Yiddish teachers are fluent in Yiddish, the home language of the students in that class, and use both the Native language of the students and English throughout the school day and to assess student progress. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status All newcomer Beginner ELLs and SIFE students are provided with small group instruction allowing for the personal attention they need to become integrated into the system and school community. The SIFE students are provided with ENL instruction with Native Language support in the form of dictionaries, and other grade appropriate books that incorporate their native language into the text. Newcomers are provided with descriptive labels throughout the classroom and school environment such as native language words on rooms like “bathroom” “computers” “cafeteria” and ‘library.” They are also provided with picture dictionaries and books written in both languages. Daily schedules are provided to students with both English and native language words as well as pictures. Students are also given opportunities to listen and view “living books” on the computer. The use of various native language educational websites focused on building literacy is incorporated into the curriculum. SIFE students are provided additional support with reintegration into the academic system by having sessions with the ENL teacher focus on learning the school culture and expectations. ENL and classroom teachers collaborate to create visual and behavioral supports to aid SIFE students in their academic process. Teachers also work with parents to ensure understanding of school expectations and consistency between school and home academic activities. For all students, including those receiving services for 4-6 years, the program focuses on short-term and long-term goals. The short-term goals focus on improvements that can be made within a single lesson or week’s worth of lessons, including learning and using new vocabulary words and improving their ability to follow directions. These individual skills are geared towards accomplishing the long-term goals, which include improved ability to express needs and desires, increased social interaction, and increased ability to be independent. Goals are adapted to the learner, where students with alternate assessment will be given goals appropriate to their skill set and learning abilities, while those who take standardized tests will focus more on increasing general and academic vocabulary, as well as reading skills and reading comprehension. Lessons take advantage of all technology available, namely computers running programs geared for either 6:1:1 or 12:1:1 populations, visual symbols, communication devices, and classroom libraries. The program utilizes materials developed by Trophies, Go Math, Reading A-Z, Total Physical Response (TPR), and various scaffolding techniques. Our long term ELL students will continue to be supported through the communication and technology components of their educational program. They will continue receiving ENL services until English proficiency is achieved as determined by tests results. Our former ELLs will be supported with 90 minutes per week of integrated ENL services for 2 years after becoming English proficient by the ENL teacher's collaboration with classroom teachers to ensure a smooth transition into the rest of their 1  education. ENL teachers work with former ELLs while integrating into their class to service other current ELLs, and provide on demand consultation to classroom teachers to address any lingering ELL issues that former ELLs may have. Common planning time can be used to plan specific supports and targeted instruction between classroom and ENL teachers. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? As all of our students have special needs, instruction of the ENL/Bilingual teacher as well as regular classroom teachers is centered on individual student abilities and goals mandated by their IEP. The teachers of ELLs infuse ENL strategies into their instruction (scaffolding, visual and native language supports, total physical response, natural approach). Using age- and grade- appropriate Trophies, Go Math or D75 curriculum, Attainment program for Reading and Writing and Math for children with severe cognitive and language delays, as well as Amplify ELA curriculum in the Yiddish Bilingual Program and other supplemental materials (such as adapted books, communication boards, etc.) ELL teachers integrate the school theme and content areas with ENL standards and modify reading material (stories) and classroom libraries. For every subject including math, science, and social studies, teachers use age appropriate and grade appropriate materials that are then adapted to be accessible to students of all levels of cognitive functioning. Many adapted books are created and printed by teachers using Boardmaker software, etc. Materials are geared toward helping students develop skills aligned with the Common Core Standards. Technology such as Smart Boards, I-Pads, computers, and AAC devices are used to engage and motivate students and provide multiple entry points into each lesson for students of all abilities. For example, a lesson can include students using I-Pads as a speech output device, or to complete a matching activity for vocabulary work with visual and tactile support. Science and social studies lessons come to life using video demonstrations of extreme weather patterns when learning about climates in science, or cultural celebrations in different countries during a history lesson. Native language supports can be easily integrated into each lesson for ELLs using voice and visual aids through technology. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 100% of our student population have IEPs and are placed according to their IEP mandate within an appropriate and least restrictive learning environment. The ENL teacher and classroom teachers work collaboratively to create and implement IEP goals for our ELL students. The staff-to-student ratios are maintained throughout the school day, including during integrated and stand alone ENL sessions. ENL teachers schedule their sessions to allow for CR Part 154 driven maximum service delivery and student centered instruction that is most appropriate to each student's needs. This includes whole group, small group, and if/when possible, one-to-one instructional time within the ENL program. TEACCH (Training and Education of Autistic and Related Communication Handicapped Children), and Applied Behavioral Analysis (ABA) principles are incorporated as well. Listening, reading, speaking and writing skills are an instructional priority with the ENL/Bilingual teacher. While we try to maximize the number of kids in the ELL groups for Freestanding ENL service delivery to ensure that the mandated minutes of ENL services are provided as per CR Part 154, we also keep in mind the students' individual cognitive, developmental, behavioral and academic needs and ensure that more focused individual attention is still possible during ENL service delivery, as is necessary for each child's special needs according to his/her IEP. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. In our ENL program, all instruction is conducted in English. Lessons are aligned with the New York State New Language Arts Progressions (NLAP) as required under New York State regulation CR Part 154; the goal being English language proficiency in speaking, listening, reading and writing. Targeted intervention programs for our ELLs, all of whom fall within the SWD category include the Attainment program for reading and writing for children with severe cognitive and language delay, Readtopia, First Author, as well as Amplify ELA curriculum in the Yiddish Bilingual Program and other supplemental materials (such as adapted books, communication boards, etc.) Other reading Interventions provided are Fundations, Wilsons, and SMILE programs. Our math programs are Go Math and Integrated Algebra. Science and Social Studies are taught through a project approach with hands on activities following the D75 scope and sequence and through the Passport Social Studies program in certain classes. ENL strategies are implemented through the entire curriculum. In our Yiddish Bilingual class all core subject instruction, as well as targeted interventions are delivered in both the native 2  language and English throughout the school day. While the class uses the same school wide curriculum, materials are adapted by the teacher to be accessible to students in their native language. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? New targeted intervention programs include First Author writing program, Readtopia and Passport (for Social Studies) programs, as many of our students struggle in these areas as per our testing data. In addition, we are making our Title III program meet 2 times per week instead of once per week as we had done in previous years. This will allow for a more consistent academic and social support structure for our ELL participants, and is in accord with the wishes of the families of prior years' participants, as per their post-program feedback. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We do not plan to discontinue any programs and services for ELLs this year. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Extracurricular programs that are offered to our students include: school performances, class trips to museums, stores and other community facilities. ELLs are included in all aspects of the activities to practice language for daily living. Our ELL students receive support services from speech therapy, physical therapy, occupational therapy and counseling. ELL students are also included in services to enrich the curriculum that are supported by Project Arts and VTEA funding to provide job skill training. We are also running a CHAMPS program to encourage social skills and physical development of ELLs and non-ELLs alike, by facilitating peer interaction and language development through fun physical activity. This year we will continue to have a weekly Title III after school program for ELLs at our main site and run by our triple Bilingual/Special Ed/TESOL certified teacher, and our dually Special Ed/TESOL certified ENL teacher, with the help of bilingual paraprofessionals for native language support. This year the program will meet twice per week, and will integrate cooking and sports into a literacy and language focused curriculum. It will provide additional English language support to the ELLs, as well as help diversify students' exposure to different cultural activities by integrating students who speak many different languages into one group. Students will learn about each other's cultures through experiencing different cuisines, and explore American culture by learning about baseball, basketball and tennis, while working on their language and communication skills. Students will participate in fun, yet academically rigorous tasks that are closely aligned with the 4 modalities of the NYSESLAT, and will thus have additional opportunities throughout the school year to practice and develop their speaking, listening, reading and writing skills in English. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. ENL and Bilingual curriculum is closely aligned with students’ regular classroom work and is focused on building oral communication and literacy skills. We use a variety of printed materials including ELA and math curriculum books, other grade and developmental level appropriate books, bilingual books, bilingual picture dictionaries, photo cards, visual symbols, Boardmaker adapted books, online books, online educational websites, I-pad books and educational apps and language focused computer software, and Smart Boards to support our ELLs. Assistive technology such as communication devices are also used when appropriate to support our students based on their individual needs and abilities. Each classroom is supplied with leveled reading books and literacy building games. Books in the students’ native language are also available for story time and building transferable literacy skills for students with emergent literacy in their native language. Students work with technology using literacy promoting websites, (Reading A-Z, Raz Kids, Starfall, BrainPop, PBS Kids.org, etc.) accessible through classroom computers, ipads, and the Smart Board. In addition, in order to help our ELLs prepare to take the NYSESLAT, we have invested into the New York ELLs Bilingual Common Core curriculum series, which provides lessons and practice assessments based on thematic topics across the common core subjects that mimic the NYSESLAT in their format. These are available to ELLs and their teachers in various grade levels and can be used to plan whole lessons or to supplement instruction. We have observed less testing anxiety in our students taking the NYSESLAT in the spring after using these materials to prepare them for the testing format. 3  13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? To support native language development many of our students are provided with Alternative Placement Bilingual Paraprofessionals, who speak their native language, as mandated by their IEPs. Other bilingual staff, including classroom teachers, provide native language assistance to students throughout the day. The ENL teachers speak several languages, including Russian, Spanish, Albanian and French and are thus able to provide native language assistance to many ELLs as well as their families in our school. Additional assistance is provided in forms of bilingual and native language dictionaries, heterogeneous student grouping, visual aids and labels in the students’ native language, native language reading libraries, and access to technology and native language websites to support native language development. In our Yiddish Bilingual class all core subjects are taught in both the native language and in English on a daily basis by our certified bilingual teachers, using printed materials in both languages for visual support. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. We ensure that all supportive services and resources correspond to our students’ ages and grade levels, and are consistent with their cognitive/developmental levels as outlined in their IEPs. We often use grade/age appropriate materials adapted with more accessible language to engage and motivate students who have lower literacy skills. We rely on technology and visual aids to support emergent literacy development while covering age/grade appropriate content. At our elementary school sites the main focus of all students, regardless of ELL status is building interpersonal communication, oral language development, and literacy skills. Our ENL program has the same goal as its priority. At the main building which serves grades 6-12, the team teaching ENL classroom service delivery model allows our ELLs to learn all of their content with the ongoing support of their classroom TESOL certified teacher. Thus while they are working on age and level appropriate subject matter, their language needs are being addressed simultaneously. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Several of our off-sites share the building with other gen ed schools. In these buildings all common areas, including the cafeterias, gym, auditorium, library, playground are made available to all students including ELLs, and special times can be allocated for shared use of space. Visual aids and labels are posted throughout the building wherever appropriate/necessary to help ELLs and other students navigate their school environment. Bilingual staff follows students closely to ensure they have language assistance whenever necessary. Common activities (such as school performances and special events are coordinated with other schools to give our students, including ELLs access to interaction with the gen ed population. In these circumstances language support is provided by bilingual staff, speech therapists and classroom teachers and paras using visual aids, and the students' families are invited to come and join them in school-wide celebrations. Our building libraries contain books in many languages, and are made available to students in all schools that share the buildings. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Upon enrollment in our school, all students, including ELLs, and their families receive support from our parent coordinator who works with them to help them access community support services for families with children with special needs, including ENL/Bilingual services, translation and interpretation services, financial and medical assistance programs, and case management services. Students who enroll before the beginning of the school year are supported through our Chapter 683 summer program, which includes academics as well as many other cultural fun activities during the summer months. ELLs (and their families) are assisted by our bilingual staff including our parent coordinator, teachers, paraprofessionals, counselors, and nurse, with the help of translators whenever the needed language is not spoken by a particular staff member. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We currently do not offer language electives at 370K as our students have severe cognitive and developmental disabilities and are exempt from a foreign language requirement based on their IEPs. However, our Yiddish bilingual students who are served 4  in the Yiddish bilingual classes receive daily instruction in their native language and have opportunities to develop their native language literacy skills as well as English literacy skills on a regular basis. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Currently, 370K only features ENL and TBE programs. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The ENL/Bilingual teachers as well as other staff members who work with ELLs, such as classroom teachers, related service providers, and paraprofessionals, and assistant principals attend and will continue to attend PDs relevant to serving our ELLs. These include ELL district/citywide PD sessions (for ENL teachers and ELL compliance Liaisons), and other relevant trainings geared toward improving English language skills in District 75 populations. Among intended PD topics are: ELL Curriculum Planning (provided by District 75 Office of English Language Learners), New Teacher Support series, incorporating ENL strategies and methodologies into classroom teaching, etc. During our school PD days and monthly whole team staff meetings teachers attending the district workshops will turn-key relevant information to all staff members. Teachers and assistant principals will meet monthly to discuss teaching concepts and ideas presented as well as how they are implementing these strategies in their classrooms. In addition to explicit turn-keying opportunities at school wide PD days provided by the administration, ENL teachers regularly share ENL strategies when discussing particular curriculum ideas at regular weekly team common planning sessions with other teachers and providers. Also, as part of our Title III program this and every year we will hold professional development workshops focusing on learning how to incorporate the linguistic schemas of the current TItle III program topics to increase language and communication skills for our ELLs in the after school program, as well as in the classroom. ELL teachers and assistant principal will participate in this PD, and will share relevant information with other staff members during regular common planning sessions. In addition, the ENL staff has organized a Staff/Parent Resource Library with books and video resources focused on helping children with special needs develop language and communication skills. The materials from this library are made available to all staff and families of our students as additional education and professional development tools. Finally, both our pedagogical and our non-pedagogical staff, such as school secretaries, unit coordinators, nurses, parent coordinator, assistant principals, etc. receive ongoing training by our ELL Compliance Liaison on issues pertaining to ELL Compliance and working with ELL students and families (including proper ELL identification procedures and documentation, translation and interpretation requirements and options, ELL relevant resource coordination, etc.) However, the ELL identification process itself, starting with the administration of the home language identification survey, is completed by a pedagogue trained in the ELL identification process. Our teachers receive ongoing DOE and District 75 issued training pertaining to the proper implementation of the Common Core Learning Standards in our monthly school-wide PDs and outside trainings that each teacher is encouraged to select every 5  year based on their own interests and their students' particular needs. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. All staff members will be sent for ELL training provided by the district office to obtain a minimum of 10 hours, as per Jose P. Upon completion of the Jose P. training each employee receives a certificate which is filed in their personnel folders. The administration and the ELL Compliance Liaison maintain an updated list of all staff members who have either completed or are working on completed their hours requirement. This list is update every year and is submitted to the ELL Department along with other ELL documentation. In addition, the District 75 Office of ELLs holds several ELL focused PD sessions each year that our ELL teachers as well as classroom teachers are encouraged to attend. The staff who attend later turn-key the information during weekly teacher team meetings. PD agendas and staff attendance records are kept on file for each district or school-wide PD session and each teacher team meeting. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Because 100% of our student population has IEPs, the entire IEP team (classroom teacher, admin, related service providers, and ENL teacher) attends the IEP meetings which are scheduled at least annually, or more frequently if needed, to communicate with parents regarding ELL goals/progress. Our school actively encourages the parents of all students to be involved. Parents are communicated with on a nearly daily basis to inform them of their child’s progress. Parents are encouraged to attend parent teacher conferences, but also to come for the performances, dances, holiday celebrations and step-up ceremonies in which their children perform or are otherwise involved. Parents are routinely informed of ENL and Bilingual conferences that they can attend. Our ELL parents are very active and participate in numerous activities throughout the school year. All communications are also provided to the families in their native language either through written or oral translations. The DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit is used whenever a particular language is not available among our bilingual school staff to assist parents in communicating with the school. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our school holds regular Parent Association Meetings to discuss issues pertinent to all students, including ELLs. During these meetings our Spanish bilingual parent coordinator (with the help of interpreters for other languages if necessary) works with the parents of ELLs to help them get connected to appropriate services and community resources, and provide relevant information to help them navigate the social service system. The Title III ENL/Bilingual teachers in collaboration with the after school paraprofessionals have an open door policy in every after school program session, where parents are encouraged to attend and participate in the activities with their children. This is done to inform the parents about the activities of the after school program and how they can be carried over into the home. Whenever parents attend, the after school staff present specific strategies that parents can use at home to help their children with disabilities develop language, communication, and literacy skills by engaging in fun culturally based language rich activities corresponding to the current program theme. Parents will be engaged in hands-on activities of creating appropriate language-rich materials for their children to use with them at home to promote school-home connections in academics. Parents will be provided with printed materials in their native language as well as English, and bilingual support staff assists in interpretation. In addition, the ENL staff has organized and coordinates a Staff/Parent Resource Library with books and video resources in 6  various languages focused on helping children with special needs develop language and communication skills. The materials from this library are made available to all staff and families of our students as additional education and professional development tools. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 7 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Susan Miller, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 8  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P370K (The Jim Thorpe School) School DBN: 75K370 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Susan Miller Title Principal Hope Smith Assistant Principal Vincente Wilson Parent Coordinator Olga Maryamchik ENL/Bilingual Teacher Cathy Wolf Parent Oren Finkel / Bilingual (Yiddi Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Marsela Divija Other ENL Teacher Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 09/20/2017 09/20/2017 09/20/2017 09/20/2017 09/20/2017 09/20/2017 9 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: The Jim Thorpe School Superintendent: Ketler Louissaint DBN: 75K370 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Vicente Wilson Parent Coordinator yes yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. PS 370 collects information about the parents preferred language of written and oral communication with the school upon enrollment using part III of the HLIS, and informal interview with the families, and if needed, the Parents Preferred Language Form, translated into all most common available languages, as well as Student Emergency Contact cards, updated every year. The information is then entered into ATS by our School Secretary. In addition, each new school year all parents are surveyed regarding their preferred language of communication either in person or through a mailing or verbal phone conversation by the students' classroom teachers and paraprofessionals serving as interpreters. The survey results are compared with the adult preferred language currently listed in the ATS database and are updated if necessary. 0  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Albanian Arabic Bengali Cantonese Chinese (any) Haitian Creole Mandarin Russian Spanish Urdu Uzbek Vietnamese Yiddish 291 2 5 4 0 21 3 0 7 41 2 2 2 6 75% .5% 1% 1% 0% 5.5% 1% 0% 1.5% 10.5% .5% .5% .5% 1.5% 291 2 7 3 9 3 3 9 7 41 1 2 2 6 75% .5% 1.5% 1% 2% 1% 1% 2% 1.5% 10.5% .5% .5% .5% 1.5% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. None Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Beginning of the School Year Package. (School Calendar, A Parent's Guide to Special Education Services for School Age Children, and Achieve NYC Guide to NYC Public Schools.) Every September Upon enrollment to every new student and parents/ guardians. How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The package is available in several languages from the DOE and will be distributed to families according to their language preference when available. 1  SESIS Documents ( IEP Documents) Whenever the IEP is due. Bilingual Staff Members will assist in translation and interpretation. NYCDOE Translation and Interpretation Unit will be used if bilingual staff in the needed language is not available. SESIS will automatically translate notices into several languages. A reminder is sent at least two weeks before the IEP is due. Notices about students' eligibility for various services. At the beginning of the year, a calendar of the expected events is distributed to every family. Two weeks before the events. One week before the event, our staff sends reminders or contacts the parents via phone and mail. Bilingual Staff Members will assist in translation and interpretation. NYCDOE Translation and Interpretation Unit will be used if bilingual staff in the needed language is not available. Purchase orders with "The Big Word" vendor will be used as needed. Whenever a written translation is not possible in a specific language in a timely manner due to a short turn around time between the notice and actual date of an event, our bilingual staff contact the parent by phone to convey the information in the preferred language verbally. Also, we send a translated written notice home with the student. NYCDOE Translation and Interpretation Unit will be used if bilingual staff in the needed language is not available. Google Translate will be used for certain notices to assist staff in translation. 2  NYSITELL / NYSESLAT results. Within one week of receiving the results, the school sends notices home with the students and via mail. Continuing entitlement/non-entitlement letters are available in several languages on the DOE intranet and will be edited to include the child's test results, and used to communicate with parents. Bilingual Staff Members will assist in translation and interpretation. NYCDOE Translation and Interpretation Unit will be used if bilingual staff in the needed language is not available. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent -Teacher Conference Fall/Spring Sit-in-your-child's seat days. Fall/ Winter/ Spring interpretation service(s)? Our bilingual staff is always on standby for oral interpretation and the Translation and Interpretation Unit is used for over the phone interpretation whenever a bilingual staff member is not available for a particular language Bilingual Staff Members will assist in translation and interpretation. NYCDOE Translation and Interpretation Unit will be used if bilingual staff in the needed language is not available. IEP meeting Various dates during the academic school year. Bilingual Staff Members will assist in translation and interpretation. NYCDOE Translation and Interpretation Unit will be used if bilingual staff in the needed language is not available. 3  Parent meetings. September- August of every year. Bilingual Staff Members will assist in translation and interpretation. NYCDOE Translation and Interpretation Unit will be used if bilingual staff in the needed language is not available. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We send out letters using parents' preferred language of communication to inform them of fire drills, soft and hard lock-downs. We have bilingual staff members who communicate via email and telephone with parents and guardians to inform them of any unexpected occurrence that might happen in our school. NYCDOE Translation and Interpretation Unit will be used if bilingual staff in the needed language is not available. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Our staff members, and parent coordinator in particular, receive training at the beginning of every academic year as well as ongoing support during the year and when they need assistance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Upon enrollment, along with all other required documentation we have provided all parents with a translated Bill of Parents Rights and Responsibilities. The Welcome Poster and translation services availability signs are posted throughout the building and the translation office telephone number is posted at our security desk, main office, and parent coordinator’s office. Whenever a written translation is not possible in a specific language in a timely manner due to a short turn around time between the notice and actual date of an event, our bilingual staff contact the parent by phone to convey the information in the preferred language verbally, with the help of the Translation and Interpretation Unit, if necessary, and a cover letter or notice is sent home on the face of the English document in the 4  appropriate covered language(s), indicating how a parent can request free translation or interpretation of such document. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We use annual surveys to collect feedback from parents on the quality and availability of the services we provide at our school, including language access services. The results of the surveys are reviewed by our administration and appropriate measures are taken to improve the quality of services if needed based on the feedback. Such measures may include additional staff training, change in school policy/procedures, seeking external guidance/support from appropriate DOE offices, identification of other available resources to address parent needs, etc. 5 
