 School Name: 23K392 I.S. 392 Principal: INGRID JOSEPH   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)  Section 1: School Information Page School Information Intermediate School 392 23K392 School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Phone Number: 332300010392. Grades 6-8 104 Sutter Avenue 718-498-2491 School Number (DBN): 718-346-2804 Fax: Sonia Hurdle-Lundi shurdle2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Ingrid Joseph Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: JoyelleRance-Fisher Tanya Samuels Sonia Hurdle-Lundi SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: KetishaPeters N/A N/A Geographical District: 23 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information MiatheresaPate Superintendent: 1784 Park Place mpate@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-346-0816 Phone Number: 718-385-3786 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Brooklyn FSC: Executive Director: Bernadette Fitzgerald   Executive Director’s Office Address: Brooklyn West Regional Bfitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-3954 Phone Number: 718-935-2382 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Ingrid Joseph JoyelleRance-fisher Vacancy KetishaPeters N/A N/A Krystle Daniels-Felix Sonia Hurdle ShemikaValentine Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Member/TEACHER Member/TEACHER Member/TEACHER   Name Isaiah Brooks Christine Mundell-Chang MaurisaDash Tanya Samuels Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/PARENT Member/PARENT Member/PARENT Member/PARENT Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission at I.S. 392, is to promote academic excellence by infusing the arts and 21st Century skills to prepare students for college and careers.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. At I.S. 392, The School for the Gifted and Talented, we are dedicated to a student-centered program that promotes academic excellence through an enriched, rigorous inter-disciplinary curriculum. We believe that all students can learn at multiple entry points and that they can become College and Career ready through engaging, high-order instructional experiences. We serve students in grades 6-8, special education populations (12-1-1) and integrated co-teaching (ICT) classes. To support our mission we have a number of partnerships which help to support us in achieving our mission. Our partnerships support different populations within our school community, whether it is our male/female students, target population, special education or high achieving students. Some of our partnerships include: ● Teachers & Writers Collaborative - seeks to spark the imagination of students by offering innovative creative writing programs for students and teachers, and by providing a variety of publications and resources to support learning through the literary arts. T&W sends professional writers to our school to teach imaginative writing and conducts professional development workshops for teachers and administrators. After working with the students they are able to present their published pieces after learning different writing techniques. ● Computer Science for all, College Access for all and Single Shepherds are some of the other centrally initiated programs that support our vision. ● Izone Blended Learning Institute, prepares our teachers to lead 21st century classrooms. In the Blended Learning Institute (BLI), teachers learn how to tap the potential of technology to meet students’ individual needs, skill levels and interests. Our teachers attend multiple workshops and then collaborate with one another to decide how to implement a blended learning model for their own classroom. ● Girl Code, a group that meets weekly to assist young women in developing behaviors that are appropriate to a school and various other social settings, while assisting them in making better choices. ● SONYC After School Program provides, dance, violin, sports, musical theater, vocals and leadership. ● Brooklyn Connections is a school outreach initiative based out of Brooklyn Public Library's Brooklyn Collection. Our signature partnership program offers classes rare access to original archival materials, while completing a customized, standards-based project. In addition, Brooklyn Connections supports NYC educators and students through professional development workshops, school visits and online resources. ● Special Education teachers are also included in the training of all initiatives and are a part of vertical and horizontal team so that these populations are also provided access to all instructional frameworks, likewise, they are supported with tools such as tablets for reading and intervention programs such as Study Island and Mathletics ● Other STEM related enhancements include a computer coding course for 6th, 7th & 8th graders using Googlechrome books to work on coding using various curriculum including NY City Code. All classrooms have laptops ● Partnership with GOOGLE CS_FIRST enables students to complete an online course in coding and video game design ● AVID College Readiness System will continue to strengthen college readiness for students. Some of the strategies in AVID promote self and peer evaluation, appropriate interactions with adults, quick writes, Cornell Notes and WICOR strategies to promote student independence. This initiative is done in collaboration with the National AVID Foundation. The four essentials of AVID (Leadership, Systems, Instruction and Culture) will drive the implementation across the school. ● Further training will be provided through the interschool partnership Learning Partners, which uses strong leverage points of partnering schools/host school to improve the practice of the peer school. 0   Arts Matter, provides an itinerant Theater teacher and Broadway Jr. are two arts related partnerships we  have adopted. Junior Achievement exposes students to corporate partners to teach them about the specifics of various careers choices. In addition, students engage in a year long course of financial literacy which involves many simulations of financial situations. Facing History and Urban Advantage, are integrated teaching programs we infuse into our school programs.   To support our computer science programs, IS 392 the will continue to implement the SEP-Computer Science Engineering Program and the Verizon -Project Lead the Way, which provides multiple experiences in coding, robotics, and app development; we are also implementing both of these initiatives  As we continue to expand and refine our practice, we have enhanced our pedagogy with more Professional Development that equips teachers to facilitate various student centered practices (this includes Socratic Circles, Literature Circles, student initiated questioning and better teacher crafted questions) We have invested a lot of time in promoting a school culture (using Restorative Circles) that family engagement and community support are visible and are continuously implementing initiatives to foster a student empowered school. The many partnerships mentioned help to strengthen and promote family education and student independence. This work has resulted in the greatest impact of the Framework for Great Schools in “Rigorous Instruction,” due to the observable classroom practices that have made students the center of instruction.  At the same time, we will foster a College and Career ready environment by promoting academic self management and a growth mindset in all stake holders using the AVID system and the DOE's- College Access for all. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We have two self contained (12:1:1) special education classes and one ICT class on each grade. This year, we have made movement of students from self contained classes to ICT classes. Our population of special education students are also deficient in engaging in rich conversation and activities that foster conversation and student ownership. As a result, our special needs teachers participate in vertical and horizontal teams to receive the same training as regular education teachers. With some modification, this helps to promote coherence across our school and equity for all students. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. As a result, our instructional focus is: To promote student engagement through rigorous student led classrooms using a variety of questioning and discussion techniques while engaging in high level experiences that prepare students for college and careers. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 23K392 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 295 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 17 17 10 10 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 9 7 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 75.0% % Attendance Rate 66.4% % Reduced Lunch 0.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.7% 15.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.36 6% 11% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 67.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 15 15 7 95.0% 9.2% 16.6% 74.9% 4.1% 4.7% 2 22% 8 38.2% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A YES NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. After review of the work done with our teams last year, it was agreed upon by all staff that having opportunities to discuss and analyze student work, is a critical component in moving our students to the next level and supports the implementation of instructional expectations. Frequent review of data helps to inform instruction and classroom teaching. Furthermore, teachers continued to receive feedback about their practice from classroom visits, QR, PPOs etc., which revealed an increase in student interaction from previous years. In order to have multiple opportunities to share practices and align/plan for the demands of the CCLS, teachers noted that the collaborative time helped with their understanding of what students need to know and how to enhance their instruction. In the same vein, teachers want to assist each other in developing and analyzing the complex tasks that are part of the common core instructional shifts. Strengths Structures to facilitate Common core aligned curricula are in place at IS 392: Expeditionary Learning, GoMath, iReady and EngageNY Units. Intervention is provided via Commonlit, Newsela, Spellcity, Learnzillion, Kahn Academy, Study Island and Mathletics. Curricular and tasks are refined and revised using student work and data. Skedula is used to record data and to analyze work to provide entry points for future lessons. Vertical and horizontal teams analyze student work and make revisions to their units to provide more opportunities for a wider array of writing genres, which has also resulted in unified assessment calendars and rubrics. In other content areas such as Science and Social Studies, teachers have infused the shifts in reading and writing. This is evidenced by the tasks that mirror the NY City performance tasks along with text based research and argument writing with emphasis on using evidence from many sources. Cumulative projects in all content areas are assigned on a monthly basis with scaffolds for all learners. Data from the Danielson Framework demonstrates consistent progress in questioning and discussion techniques. Multiple PD opportunities to address this area of concern has been implemented, along with investment in resources and planning time. Students in the lowest one third and our special needs population are deemed as a priority. Need: More consistency in Differentiated instruction, which will result in purposeful groups while promoting activities such as quick writes, infusing of discussion STEMS that promote independence via the use of questioning, that extends thinking and learning while deepening understanding. Part 2 – Annual Goal 3  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of the teachers will expose students to differentiated instructional strategies for subgroups of students including SWD's that provide opportunities for critical thinking while promoting student ownership, resulting in an increase of at least 5 % moving from level 1 to 2 and from levels 3 to 4 on New York State Assessments in ELA and Mathematics. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Professional Development by the Principal, AP, Coaches, Model Teachers and Peer Collaborative teachers will be provided. In addition, teachers will attend PD by external providers such as Great Books, CITE and Department of Education's: Learning Partners, Showcase Schools, Facing History, Algebraforall and CSforall.  Participate in monthly collaborative grade meetings (across disciplines) on the fourth Monday of each month to discuss/share student quantitative and qualitative data to plan for next steps. In addition, monthly inquiry meetings will focus on feedback provided from the larger group. Scheduled visits of Learning Partner schools will be scheduled to view and observe practices, along with teaching coaching in those areas.   Observation feedback assessing those frameworks will be given to teachers in a timely manner.  Teachers will study rubrics and videos to understand the structures. Adopt DOE's Collegeforall initiative and AVID College Readiness Systems schoolwide to assist students in acquiring skills that prepare them for College & Careers. Assist in the creation of a menu of intervention services (small groups, Saturday Academy, Study Hall, Extended Day, mentoring clubs, Advisories and Restorative Circles that will address the needs of the identified students. (lowest 1/3 and special needs students) Parents will be acquainted with Common Core standards with related workshops that will be provided by the SLT and other PD providers. Parents will be trained in Socratic circles to better understand the process; in addition “Parent Pop Up” visits will be scheduled so parents can observe the practice. Parents of the Targeted Population students (lowest 1/3) will be apprised with tools to assist their children at home through Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers September 2018 -June 2019 Administration, Great Books Staff, Learning Partners Peer Schools, Model Teachers, Coach, AVID foundation Target Population September 2018 -June 2019 Teachers, Administrators Parents Parents September 2018 -June 2019 5  periodic meetings to assist them in understanding the deficits of their children and to expose them to resources and strategies to assist them at home. - 3b – Parent and Family Engagement - - - How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. -Conduct parent training to expose them to standards -Convene weekly at the "Principal's Hour" -Engage in other types of parent events such as Mix and Mingle with the Principal, Morning Muffins with the Principal, and Books and Bagels Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Efforts to support this goal will be directly linked to teacher’s salaries- FSF and Title I-SWP. Additionally, materials to support these efforts will be used form OTPS-FSF general supplies and NYSTL library and textbook funding. AIS programs will be funded by the same sources, teachers will work directly with small groups of targeted students to provide academic support and remediation. Per session hours will be provided to all staff involved in the programs. Funds will be used from FSF. Other resources will include: Principal AP Model Teachers External PD Parent Coordinator Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other 6  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Vertical and horizontal grade meetings will be imbedded in the schools’ programming throughout the year and a part of the school culture . Other teams such as the STEM team, AVID team, Arts team will meet so there is alignment across the school. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan if necessary. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strengths: Based on data from our School Quality Guide, 93% of our students feel safe in the school. 96% of our students are satisfied with the support their receive from the guidance team. Additionally, during both PPO visits, the school was rated highly effective in this area.(3.4) On the School Quality Guide, teachers responded that 89% of teachers, teach skills that assist students in regulating their behavior. Similarly, 90% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the adults at their school have access to school based supports to assist behavior or emotional escalations. Furthermore, we provide our students with clubs and advisories built into their schedule, which provide a variety of activities (i.e. Mouse Squad, yoga, soccer, health and fitness, yearbook, poetry, culinary, etc.) We also have after school program (SONYC), which gives our diverse population of students, additional academic and social supports beyond the regular school day. Other social/emotional activities which address student behavior included Girl Chat and Boy Chat. To help support our students socially and emotionally, we have advisory, as well as restorative circles, which is a framework for building community and for responding to challenging behavior through authentic dialogue, coming to an understanding and resolving issues. These circles help to build community, teach restorative concepts and skills, and harness the power of restorative circles to set things right when there is conflict. Using these methods consistently will help to create calmer, more focused classrooms. This is supported with our staff, guidance counselor, and Single Shepherds. The shepherds, are mentors who support students through graduation, listen to, advocate for, and connect students with resources for success in school, in their future endeavors, as well as in in college and career. To further cultivate a quality school climate, we will train additional staff for the 7th grade in restorative circles. Our School Culture Team will meet systematically to address behaviors and reflect on practices that promote an environment conducive for learning. Priority Needs: 8  Based on data from the 2018 School Quality Guide, 74% of students agreed that their teachers listen to their ideas while 85% agree that there is at least one adult they can confide in. Additionally, 50% of students agreed that most students at their school treat each other with respect. This data is lower than the district's average in all areas. With an increase in our special education student population from 2 to 3 ICT classes and from 1 to 2 self-contained classes, in an effort to support students with IEPs meet the high academic expectations of IS 392, we need to expand our social/emotional supports, which will be supported with implementation of Single Shepherds and Restorative Circles. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of students at IS 392 will participate in a variety of research based Social Emotional Learning (SEL) programs such as Restorative Circles and Executive Functioning to enhance an environment where students are reflective of their behaviors, resulting in a 5% increase in the domains relating to supportive environment on the NYC School Survey . 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). -Provide periods to push in or pull out -Continue to build time in schedule to support SWD -Train staff to understand effective strategies to deal with SWD Development of a School Counseling Team to plan and execute the desired outcomes for school climate using various curricula: Circle Forward Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? -SWD July 2018-June 2019 -Administration -Hiring team -Staff -School population July 2018-June 2019 -Counseling team Continue to support the social emotional needs of students with IEPs throughout the year by providing resource room periods throughout their weekly program, after school supports, assembly and guidance programming. SWD July 2018-June 2019 Provide common planning time with teachers to discuss the needs of students and create action plans -SWD July 2018-June 2019 -Selected teachers -AP -Principal Counseling team -Selected teachers -AP -Principal -Administration Teachers SBST School Program -Administration Guidance Team Push in of guidance team, which includes guidance counselor and 3 Single Shepherds (guidance counselor and 2 social workers to support students academically, socially, and emotionally with guidance team working on grade specific issues Monthly assemblies to discuss issues relating to school climate -School population July 2018-June 2019 --School population -July 2018-June 2019 - -Administration Guidance Team 0 Continue to refine school mentoring programs to ensure all at-risk students are assigned to a mentor -School population July 2018-June 2019 -Administration Guidance Team All students will participate in Advisories as a tool to foster better communication and problem- solving skills -School population July 2018-June 2019 -Entire school community 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will use various avenues to acquaint parents to initiatives to support them at home, while helping them understand what Supportive Environment entails. At the PTA meetings, Principal's Mix and Mingle and the Principal's Hour, these conversations will be commonplace. Additionally, we will model what some of these structures look like and have parents participate. For example, we will use Restorative Circles to discuss and mediate issues that arise. We will also keep parents informed through our parent dashboard, Skedula. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Efforts to support this goal will be directly linked to teacher’s salaries- FSF and Title I-SWP. Additionally, materials to support these efforts will be used from OTPS-FSF general supplies and NYSTL library and textbook funding. AIS programs will be funded by the same sources; teachers will work directly with small groups of targeted students to provide emotional support and remediation. Guidance counselors, Single Shepherds and staff from Morningside Center will provide training and support. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, referrals and discipline data such as detentions and suspensions will be assessed to determine the impact. The effectiveness of the program will be assessed by the reduction of OORS incidents by 5% along with less severe incidents in the Level 3 & 4 category. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. In February 2019, a review of progress towards meeting the annual goal, will be assessed using OORs Summary data and School Quality Report data. Revisions to the plan will be made if applicable. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: -Our scores on NY State Standardized assessments revealed 68% of students proficient in ELA and 58% (w Regents) in Math respectively. -Teachers received a highly effective rating on PPO visit on the structure, execution and protocols used during teacher teams along with practices used in the classroom as a result of the analysis of student work and the collaborative work . -On the School Quality Guide, 95% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that overall, their professional development experiences this year have included opportunities to work productively with colleagues in their school. The complex nature of the CCLS requires that we continuously work on taking a deeper dive into aligning and implementing the CCLS into our day-to-day work to ensure that students are meeting and exceeding the rigorous demands of the CCLS. Similarly, school initiatives require us to work collaboratively to attain mastery of instructional practices while empowering teachers to enhance their practices based on data from teacher evaluations. Due to the observations/feedback given to us in our PPO, informal visits, Quality Review from 1.2 (teacher pedagogy), it is critical that we leverage the strengths of our master teachers to assist all teachers in enhancing their practice. IS 392 continues to be a participant in Model Teachers, Peer Collaborative, AVID Teacher teams, Showcase Schools and Learning Partners which provide high leverage learning opportunities for growth. In most classrooms, teachers regularly incorporate effective questions and scaffolds to even levels of student thinking and participation. Most teachers facilitate student-centered classrooms while others are continuing to employ more student centered classrooms, while conducting study groups and refining their work in that area. In most classrooms, student-to student interaction has increased and students initiate their own questions. Teachers are given the opportunities to work on vertical and horizontal teams and pushed to use various protocols for reflection. TeachBoost provides instantaneous feedback and resources from school leaders about classroom visits. Teachers collaborate to create performance tasks in all content areas. Needs: 2  Improve alignment of checks for understanding as it relates to student responses while working collaboratively to create discussion protocols, coupled with performance tasks that are aligned to standards. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 95% of teachers will work collaboratively to analyze student performance tasks to improve students' higher thinking skills as evidenced by a 5% increase in students moving from level 1 to level 2 and from levels 3 to 4 pm on New York State Assessments in ELA and Mathematics. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administration will monitor implementation by adjusting the school’s observation protocol to reflect the identified instructional shifts. Progress, effectiveness and impact will be evaluated on an ongoing basis at Data Meetings on Mondays as well as at grade and subject level meetings. Target Population September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Administration, Support Staff, Parents Administration, Teachers, Model teachers, Peer Collaborative teacher, Coach A lead instructional school based CCLS planning team/teacher teams will be identified to support and plan the implementation of the citywide instructional expectations. Teachers September 2018-June 2019 · The lead instructional team will participate in a professional learning community led by the district, DOE . Simultaneously, the lead instructional team will be supported through various professional development activities which include conferences, site visits, coaching, etc. The PLC’s will focus on embedding formative and summative assessment within common core aligned instructional units and study the resulting student work, to determine the strength of using the literacy design and math design frameworks for aligning teaching tasks to assessment tasks. · A school based differentiated professional development plan will be created and implemented to deliver the information secured by the above activities to the entire school instructional staff. (Activities will be based on teacher need - new teachers, Math team, ELA team, Counseling Team, initiatives that need to be developed further.) · School leadership will meet weekly with the lead instructional team, join teacher team meetings weekly, and coordinate this work across grades and content areas to ensure fidelity and implementation. · Teachers will engage in job-embedded professional learning activities, as described in the school’s professional development plan, to secure the implementation of pedagogical practices that focus on the following instructional shifts: 4  · In math: require fluency, application, and conceptual understanding · In literacy, social studies and science, require students to ground reading, writing, and discussion in evidence from text. As well, build a solid foundation of text dependent questioning strategies to support deeper inquiry into content. · Teachers will develop a shared understanding of the CCLS and the expectations of college and career readiness by immersing in rigorous, ongoing professional development. · Teachers will participate in weekly team planning meetings that focus on the implementation of the CCLS by collaboratively looking at student work to guide the design and editing of formative and summative assessment tools, while constantly reviewing curriculum maps for gaps. · Teachers will produce units and lesson plans utilizing UDL to support all learners. · In literacy, teachers will design/implement rigorous tasks that ask students to read and analyze informational texts, write opinions and arguments. · In mathematics, teachers will design/implement rigorous tasks that will demonstrate the students ability to model and/or construct and explore the reasoning needed to arrive at viable solutions. · In mathematics, teachers will reorganize math content into fewer topics, allowing for more time to focus on the major work of the grade as per the Citywide Instructional Expectations. · In literacy, teachers will infuse opportunities for students to engage with a balance of literacy and informational text as well as text sufficiently complex for the grade band.  Revise schedule to accommodate additional planning time for teachers  P.O.P. (Perfecting Our Practice) –Intervisitation structure will be implemented  Providing frequent opportunities for families to engage in the learning process will be paramount in what we do this year. Parents September 2018-June 2019 Administration, Teachers, Model teachers, Peer Collaborative teacher 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 5  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will participate in Mix and Mingles with the Principal, Parent Engagement Tuesdays models/ demonstrations for parents of strategies that were identified in teams as needing reinforcement at home. Additionally, learning opportunities for parents will be provided during SLT workshops and PA meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School Administrators ( Principal, Assistant Principal)  Classroom teachers   Teachers  Model teachers  Peer Collaborative teacher   District Support  Parent Coordinator  External PD from consultants  Borough Field Center support SETSS teacher Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, administration will gather data from collaborative meetings to track the progress on skills assessed based on skills discussed in meetings. Evidence of growth will be measured based on a 5% increase on periodic assessments. Revisions to the plan will be made if necessary. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Quizzes, tests and periodic assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. At IS 392, all school events include parent participation, presentations by the PA, and Principal, in order to engage parents and model appropriate learning. We have a high participation rate at our parent events, workshops, arts related events student showcases and demonstration nights. Our Parent-Principal Trust is 95% and 100% on Effective School Leadership category on Framework for Great Schools Report. Priority needs; A measure of effective leadership is the ability of all stakeholders to take ownership of their growth and learning while being lead. With that said, staff, parents and students are apprised with tools and opportunities for advancement Parents are provided with many opportunities to meet and confer with the principal to improve the school community. Similarly, frequent events such as "The Principal's Hour" provide time to talk and share feedback. At IS 392, staff members are given choice to cultivate their craft and initiate many of their own programs for students and to enhance their learning further. (POP Visits, Intervisitations, Perfecting our Practice.) Likewise, staff are provided with many opportunities to assemble to reflect, revise and adjust practices. Tools to assist in tracking students are also commonplace, which enables them to set goals and take charge of their learning. In an attempt to hold students more accountable for their success, we have implemented student led conferences for all three marking periods. This process will assist students in taking ownership for their learning and will help prepare them for college. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, administration will strengthen their leadership abilities by developing high leverage instructional practices through intensive professional development of staff via weekly Monday PD's and team meetings. Meetings and professional development will focus on the development of skills to support arguments in all content areas, to increase discussion resulting in a 10% increase in the 3b domain of Danielson, (questioning and discussion,) hence fostering independence in adults and students. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? -Spend time revising and refining the IS 392 structure for SLC -All students September-Map out dates for all conferences -Create and revise tools to meet the needs of students -SWD June September -June -Train new staff in the structure to ensure correct execution of the process -Implement SLC across school, build time in program to make this a schoolwide practice -All students September -June -SLC Committee, Principal, AP, Coach, Model Teachers -SLC Committee, AP, Principal, Coach, Model Teachers -SLC Committee, AP, Principal, Coach, Model Teachers -Train new staff in the structure to ensure correct execution of the process -Schedule periodic assemblies for new students to observe the practice -Provide PD to teachers based on Danielson Framework to ensure they are clear on each domain -Weekly vertical and horizontal teams to ensure best practices for staff are being studied and infused across classrooms -Engage teaches in intervisitations in other classrooms across grades and other schools across districts (Learning Partners, Showcase Schools) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement -All Staff -All Staff -All Staff -September-June -Staff, Administration -September-June -Staff, Administration -September-June -Staff, Administration How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be engaged in the understanding of Effective School leadership through the use of various parent engagement activities such as the Principal's Hour, Parent Association Meetings and School leadership team 8  meetings. From September 2018-June 2019, Key personnel involved in this will be administration, parent association members , parent coordinator and parents. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. All staff including Counseling staff will facilitate an advisory group that will meet weekly during 8th period. The advisory groups on 6th grade will be using Restorative Circles Curriculum and Executive Functioning curriculum as resources. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA C4E 21st Century Grant SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018, 80% of staff will engage in practices they were trained in based on data from formative assessments. to assess the effectiveness or progress made thus far. Students: Extended Day, Saturday Academy, Lunch Tutorials, Advisories   Teachers: Grade and subject level meetings, Monday Teacher Team Meetings, RTI Meetings , Advisories Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Benchmark assessment scores will be reviewed to measure progress, since assessments will drive student goals. We will also monitor student growth between SLC's and overall improvement through beginning, middle and end of year administration of performance series. Additionally, we will review data from Advance for upward trends in 3b domain of Danielson. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Data from parent reflections distributed at each parent event, Learning Environment surveys along with conversations at the “Principal’s Hour” (Weekly parent/principal chat), revealed significant findings. Other school data such as attendance and our QR report were analyzed for trends.  Additionally, on the School Quality Guide, the school received 86%, and shared that they are likely to attend a  general school event. Likewise, 90% of parents agreed that they are invited to classrooms to observe the instructional program, while 95% of them agreed that they feel well informed by the communications they receive from their child's school. Similarly, 95% of parents are satisfied with the education their children are receiving.  The school received an overall score of 4.99, which equates to a Well-developed on how the school partners with families.  3.4 was an area of celebration/well-developed on the Quality review and PPO. Relationships across the school are warm, supportive and inclusive of students and families. Parents express their satisfaction with the level of communication between home and school. Additionally, parents feel they receive timely information regarding grades, attendance and on their smart phones through School Messenger, Remind, Social Media and Skedula/Pupilpath student information systems. The school emphasizes strong parental engagement which is a valuable method for enhancing students as well. The school continues to strive to keep parents at the forefront of everything they do which is evidenced by the increase in the Strong Family and Community ties indicator on the LES. Needs: While many partnerships have been created, more partnerships to address the capacity of all members of the school community should be forged. School needs to continue to share information to families via monthly newsletters (celebrations, upcoming events, school data, special projects etc.,) social media, websites, backpacks and school calendar to address all parents’ needs and capacity. Resources for parents will be posted on school’s website, social media, school app and a link to district 23’s website is made available to parents. Part 2 – Annual Goal 0  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, administration will strengthen opportunities which promote learning and enhance communication and collaboration among all stakeholders, while cultivating a community that promotes partnerships with families and community organizations, as measured by a 3% increase in parents positive responses on the School culture component of the NYC School Survey. 1 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students, staff , parents September 2018 -June 2019 Administration, Parent Coordinator, CBO’s-Opus, Guest speakers, Guidance counselor Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Provide more parent engagement opportunities to communicate with Families: Books & Bagels, Coffee & Conversation, Tea Talk, The Principal’s Hour, Morning Muffins with the Principal  Build new partnerships to support students and families:   Brooklyn Museum, Center for Architecture, Cornell, AT &T Further develop the online home-school connection by providing blended learning as well as enrichment through outside sources. Invest in online resources that are aligned to curriculum in all content.(McGraw Hill Math, Study Island, Virtual labs)  A parent grant to expose parents to the arts will be  written to involve parents in more arts related activities Links to educational resources will be provided for parents on school and district websites  Our School Counseling Team will facilitate workshops for families relating to articulation, adolescent issues, students with special needs, etc. Provide workshops to acquaint parents to technological tools to enhance their 21 st Century knowledge, coupled with tools to develop the home school connection, such as Skedula, School Messenger and other online academic resources such as Kahn Academy . Parents, PD Providers, CBO’s, Teachers September 2018 -June 2019 Administration, Parent Coordinator - The school will put in place a series of parent workshops which will foster a healthy level of school leadership, by encouraging and developing partnerships between our families, businesses, and community based organizations -Parents, PD Providers, CBO’s, Teachers -September 2018 -June 2019 -Administration, Parent Coordinator, CBO’s-Opus - 3b – Parent and Family Engagement - - - If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 2  Federal Alliance Savings Bank, Cornell Nutrition Cooperative, Brookdale Hospital, Operation Hope Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will use in-kind resources such as coaches, teachers and CBO’s to support these endeavors. We will also use the Tuesday Parent Engagement time, Saturdays and some evenings to achieve this goal. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded X In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By June 2019, workshops will be monitored through attendance sheets, school performances and events. Exit slips with evaluative questions will be completed at the end of each event to further enhance parent engagement and to help improve the caliber of parent involvement. Translations of these events will be available in the main office. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. By February 2019, progress towards meeting the annual goals will be assessed. Periodic surveys will be done to assess the effectiveness of programs along with qualitative data from data at school events. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) -Formative Assessments -Summative Assessments 45/90 minute block periods Whole group instruction Fluid small groups instruction-skill specific Small groups One to one tutoring During the day Lunch periods Saturday Academy -Data from Interim Assessments SETTS -Performance series Saturday Academy -Students who perform at a 1 or 2 on state assessments Mathematics -Formative Assessments -Summative Assessments -Data from Interim Assessments 45/90 minute block periods Whole group instruction Fluid small groups instruction-skill specific Small groups One to one tutoring Saturday Academy Peer tutoring During the day Lunch periods Saturday Academy -Performance series SETTS -Students who perform at a 1 or 2 on state assessments Peer tutoring Science Social Studies Teacher recommendations Teacher recommendations Small group support Small groups During the day Small group support Small groups During the day Lunch periods 4  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Staff referrals & staff observations At-risk counseling Small group During the day One-to-one Lunch periods 5  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) There are 10 students in temporary housing. 11- Shelter 10- Doubled Up 01- Temporary Housing 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students residing in shelters, motels, or other overcrowded conditions may not have a quiet place to study and may require time set aside in our journalism lab, library, or other areas in the building which will provide them with the environment needed in order to study or complete assignments. Additionally, a student who is dealing with the stress and anxiety associated with homelessness may not be able to focus on his or her studies and may benefit from counseling services. Items of clothing, such as the school’s uniform requirement and/or clothing and shoes necessary to participate in physical education classes will be provided for the student through the school or community support. Also, school supplies such as backpacks and notebooks will be provided if necessary. Extended learning time (before and after school, Saturday classes, etc.) to compensate for lack of quiet time for homework in shelters or other overcrowded living conditions. We have also provided students with technology, such as computers to take home during the school year to complete assignments and tutoring services within the school. Furthermore, support for parents, specifically oriented to reaching out to parents of homeless students so that they are provided with necessary resources, such as, food, medical and dental services, eyeglasses and hearing aids, counseling services, and/or outreach services in order to help their child. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 6 15% 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. Monies will be used to purchase supplies and provide tutoring and intervention services for students. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 7  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. The Principal, in collaboration with the District Personnel will follow the policies set forth by the Department of Education to ensure that the selection of highly qualified teachers follow the guidelines set by the New York State Education Department. Principal in collaboration with school coach, model and peer collaborative teachers, will work collaboratively to identify qualified teachers through major recruitment campaigns and through relationships with Colleges and Universities. IS 392 will train student teachers from various institutions. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional development will be provided by the Reading/Math Coach, model teachers and school administrators. The school’s professional development committee will target the assessed pedagogical needs of the staff with differentiated high quality professional development. All professional development will be evaluated to determine its effectiveness in promoting high-quality instruction leading to improved student results. Professional Development will be provided through study groups, classroom inter-visitations, network training, lab site visits, and through external resources. Administrators are also afforded the opportunity to hone their skills through network meetings, study groups and Labor Union(CSA) training sessions. Professional development during the 2018-2019 school year will have a major foci on aligning instruction to the CCLS and working with staff on teacher effectiveness Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 8  Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Through a distributive leadership model, the instructional cabinet and teacher teams devise, develop, and implement units of study with teacher made, curricular embedded formative and summative assessment. Teachers develop the assessments in teams both horizontally and vertically. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) SEE ACTION PLAN SEE ACTION PLAN Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Federal Federal 188,350 0 X X 9  Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Local 0 0 2,029,483 X X X SEE ACTION PLAN SEE ACTION PLAN SEE ACTION PLAN 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the 0  participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 1  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. IS 392, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. IS 392 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person,) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school, and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); 3  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) IS 392, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 4  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program, to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 5  ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; 6  ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 7  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 23 School Name The School For the Gifted and Talented Borough Brooklyn School Number 392 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Ingrid Joseph Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Claudia Morales Teacher/Subject Area Jillian Palazzolo/Spanish Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Dr. Miatheresa Pate Assistant Principal Loren Cooper Coach N/A School Counselor Samantha Phillips-Vargas Parent Ketisha Peters Parent Coordinator Nerissa Conway Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 311 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Total number of ELLs 1 0 4 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 1 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 1.29% 8  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 3 2 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? I.S. 392 uses several formative assessments including on-demand writing, quick writes, Exit and Entrance Tickets, Lexile Levels, along with the use of conversation and question stems, peer and teacher conferencing, projects, opportunities to talk with peers such as think pair share, turn and talk, and Socratic seminar, Ready, graphic organizers, oral and written presentations, and many teacher created assessments and checks for understanding to guide instructional planning for our ENL students. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? I.S. 392 has several structures in place to support this effort such as a school wide assessment calendar that indicates all of our testing windows for formative as well as summative assessments. Teachers meet in grade level and content teams to fine tune the calendars and add teacher created assessments. The teachers also meet in grade level teams to share best practices around break through work with ENLs so that these practices can be replicated across grades and classrooms. ENL teacher 9  provides feedback to classroom teachers regularly and communication with families is a priority. Our ENL students are fully programmed in STARS and are served in the pull out program to ensure mastery of skills and standards on grade level. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? I.S. 392 uses performance series 2 times per year, fall and spring benchmarks in ELA and Math, BOY and EOY NYC performance tasks, and baseline assessments in ELA and Math. We also use the ELA and Math data and Item Analysis to identify baseline, progress and areas of need for our ENLs and other students. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? I.S. 392 has several structures in place to support this effort such as a school wide assessment calendar that indicates all of our testing windows for formative as well as summative assessments. Teachers meet in grade level and content teams to fine tune the calendars and add teacher created assessments. The teachers also meet in grade level teams to share best practices around break through work with ENLs and other students so that these practices can be replicated across grades and classrooms. ESL teacher provides feedback to classroom teachers regularly. I.S. 392 regularly engages in Cycles of Inquiry as required by our Learning Partners Plus Initiative as well as our AVID College Readiness System which benefits our ENLs and other students. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Based on the number of years a student had been receiving services in the ENL program, student work, content area teacher recommendations, results on annual English Language Proficiency exam, content and social emotional needs of the students, and parent input and request, ENLs and other students are placed in small ELA and Math groups where teachers engage the students in small group tutoring and direct instruction. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. All outcome assessments and data patterns are used to inform and evaluate our ELL programs namely the trends and patterns seen in the NYSITELL, NYSELAT, ELA and Math Exam Scores if possible, as well as Performance Series, Regent Exams if possible, NYC Performance Tasks in ELA and Final exams/Exit Projects in content area classes such as social studies, science, and Spanish. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? I.S. 392 has several structures in place to support this effort such as a school wide assessment calendar that indicates all of our testing windows for formative as well as summative assessments. Teachers meet in grade level and content teams to fine tune the calendars and add teacher created assessments. The teachers also meet in grade level teams to share best practices around break through work with ENLs and other students so that these practices can be replicated across grades and classrooms. ENL teacher provides feedback to classroom teachers regularly. I.S. 392 regularly engages in Cycles of Inquiry as required by our Learning Partners Plus Initiative as well as our AVID College Readiness System which benefits our ENLs and other students. All inquiry findings are shared with the entire staff in order to make an impact on ENLs and as many students as possible Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students 0  regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The ENL Program is organized as a Pull- Out Model. The program is generally heterogeneous ( of mixed proficiency levels and contiguous grades as allowed by the mandates. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not applicable at this time. c. DL program. If applicable. Not applicable at this time. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ENLs are programmed in STARS for ELA and ENL instructional minutes as required by the academic policy guide. As a result , they get the required amount or more of ELA Instruction and the required amount of ENL instruction. Students are pulled out by the ENL teacher twice weekly. In ELA classes, students frequently have double blocks which is 90 minutes of ELA Daily. This is all tracked and monitored through STARS. The Principal and Assistant Principal also work closely with the ENL Teachers to ensure that students are receiving the correct number of instructional minutes according to the proficiency level of the ENL Program Model. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL program at I.S. 392 is based on the New York State Core Curriculum for English as a Second Language and the Common Core State Standards for reading, writing, and language . Its primary objective is to enable students to achieve English language proficiency as quickly as possible. The curriculum is designed to address the academic and linguistic needs of all levels of English language learners. All ENLs are afforded educational and instructional opportunities to foster their success. The ENL program is designed to intensify instruction in a variety of modalities that include: Total Physical Response, the natural language approach, the content based approach, as well as the language experience approach. Literacy and oral language instruction are integrated from the earliest language learning experiences. Students are provided simultaneous access to English oral language development, comprehensive literacy instruction, and standards-based content area instruction while utilizing the SIOP model. Instruction is based on New York State “English as a Second Language” standards. Lessons are always crafted to enable students to use English to communicate in social settings, to use English to achieve academically in all content areas in the classroom, and to use English in socially and culturally appropriate ways. The ENL teacher supplements both math and reading skills through fiction and nonfiction stories that provide content through which mathematical concepts, patterns, problem solving, and real-world contexts may be explored in read alouds, think alouds, discussion, and teacher produced projects. This is done in a small-group instruction setting through thematic units. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? At I.S. 392 we ensure that ENL students are appropriately evaluated in their home languages through out the year by starting out the identification process early, collecting home language survey data, administering the NYSITELL and the Spanish LAB if nececessary, Keeping parents informed of all results and recommendations via meetings and orientations, then, once students are in ENL program we monitor their progress to make sure that students are on track to meet requirements of the grade as an ENL student. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. Long Term 1  e. Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. There are currently no SIFE students included in the ENL program.b. ENLs in the school for less than three years are provided with practice in speaking with a specific focus on basic interpersonal communication skills necessary for navigating through the school day with teachers and classmates in a risk-free setting. Songs, rhymes, and poems are used to aide Entering students. Visual aides are used to give language and vocabulary context. Word walls with illustrations and physical manipulatives are also used to reinforce vocabulary development, understanding, and usage. Letter and number strips are used to reinforce for newcomers the letter and number formation as well as the sounds associated with the letters. In addition, read alouds, think alouds, and discussions with fiction and non fiction big books. Also, individual copies of texts are used to reinforce higher order thinking skills and content comprehension.Furthermore, the ENL teacher integrates intensive oral/aural language activities to secure listening/speaking skills. c. For ENLs receiving between four to six years of service, most typically reading comprehension and writing organization difficulties impede progress. Therefore, a variety of additional support is provided. The writing process involving brainstorming, drafting, revising, editing, and publishing enables more advanced students to hone their writing skills. Specific attention is paid to the student's ability to compose a main idea and support it with key details and a conclusion. At the same time, they practice correct grammar, syntax, and standard usage. Visuals and illustrated word walls continue to be utilized to support vocabulary development and content understanding. Furthermore, there is an alignment of goals and tasks to common core requirements and ESL standards. Graphic organizers are utilized to help students organize and synthesise ideas in reading and writing. Pre, post and interim assessments are used to determine needs and judge progress.Deeper higher order thinking questions aligned with Bloom's taxonomy are incorporated into discussions and writing and reading tasks.d. Long term ENLs would receive similar instruction to ENLs receiving between four to six years of service. ENLs identified as students with disabilities are fully integrated with general education students in ENL groups. They receive the 360 or 180 minutes of services weekly that their proficiency level indicates.e.Former ELLs in years 1 and 2, after testing Proficient in NYSESLAT, receive continuing testing accomodations and academic support for 2 years. This transitional support includes 90 minutes integrated ENL instruction, as well as Close Workshop, Writing Workshop, guided reading, and Saturday Academy for ELA and Math. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ENL students with special needs will receive instruction based on their IEPs. Special consideration is given to their specific needs.The ENL teacher uses different strategies and approaches to assist students in acquiring academic language; using context to figure out unfamiliar words and expressions as well as images and realia; one on one instructions, buddy-peer mentoring, manipulatives or a behavior plan when necessary. The ENL teacher also uses challenging but understandable materials. The teacher encourages students to participate in group discussions, and students gain advantage by receiving feedback from the teacher and their peers through modeling. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? To help these students achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment, the ENL teacher will conduct meetings with their respective classroom teachers and support service providers. These students will be included in the groups with general education students for the duration of the ENL instructional periods. Furthermore, the ENL teacher will use different strategies that help students to acquire academic language, and use context to figure out unfamiliar words and expressions, as well as one on one instruction, peer mentoring, manipulatives, or a behavior plan when necessary. The ENL teacher will use challenging but understandable materials. The teacher will encourage students to participate in group discussions, and students will gain advantage by receiving feedback from the teacher and their peers through explicit instruction and modeling. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. For ELA we currently use Expeditionary Learning along with Newsela and CommonLit in order to facilitate students reading on or above their Lexile level. These web based programs, contain instructional resources for students and allows them to read various genres at their independent reading level while having the option of having the book read to them prior to them 2  reading it independently as well as comprehension quizzes and the ability to record their reading and sending it to their teacher for evaluation and feedback. Teachers can assign specific passages and levels of reading to meet the needs of ENLs and all students. For math we use Go Math and supplement with Engage NY, Khan Academy, and Mathletics which are web based math programs that provided targeted instruction on a wide variety of topics that ENLs and other students can watch and complete and do over until they master the skill. On both sites, teachers can assign tasks for students to complete and some even have games that students can unlock as a reward for mastering a standard. In science and social studies, teacher use engaging hands on instruction that includes reading writing, listening, speaking, inquiry, and collaboration to meet the needs of ENLs. and all students. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Engaging the teachers and all students including ENLs to the benefits of the Algebra for All, Computer Science for All, and College Access For All initiatives to enhance rigor and engagement, and spark curiosity for ENLs and all students. We will also be using the newly released writing program: Educating Powerful Writers with our entire student body including ENLs and SWDs 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? This is not applicable at this time. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Equal access to all school programs is ensured by information being distributed, posted, and sent home in the home language as well as in English. After school and Saturday programs for all students including ENLs are offered in Dance, Music, Computer, Science, ELA and Math as well as in extra-curricular activities such as music, Rugby, Photography, Robotics, tennis, baskeball, and SONYC after school programming. . These programs allow ENLs to expand on their BICS while acquiring more CALPS by immersing them in learning the language not just through academics, but also through extra curricular activities and socializing with peers. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Since, technology is an important instructional tool in the ENL classroom, the SMARTBoard is utilized in order to provide extra visual aides and context for lessons using the internet. A computer center is also incorporated into ENL instructional time, where students are given opportunities to listen to books and complete activities related to thematic units. CommonLit, Spelling City and Newsela are utilized to expose students to a wide variety of authentic texts at their level. The ENL classroom has a vast library with many digital resources, which ensures students are exposed to a wide variety of genres, reading strategies, and vocabulary. Bilingual dictionaries and glossaries are always available to students, and native language supports are provided by the instructor for ELLs in all levels of language proficiency. This year we will incorporate STEM labs, a robot, and legos into our tech toolkit to use with ENL students and all students. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language is supported through the use of cognates, a bilingual alphabet chart, and culturally relevant texts in different languages. When learning new vocabulary, students are encouraged to also write the word in their notebooks, translated into the native language. Students are exposed to texts that incorporate foreign language words into English writing so students can connect to English books. Explicit use of the native language during instructional time occurs only when absolutely necessary within the framework of the ENL class, and usually with new arrivals to ease them into their new school experience. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Our ENL students receive native language support through teachers and paraprofessionals whose first language is Spanish. This group represent the majority of our ENL population. Our program also provides the students with learning opportunities that make clear links between students’ past learning and new concepts. It is done through a systematic vocabulary study that capitalizes on cognates and language/academic skill transfer. Another strategy used in the ENL classrooms to promote native language support is "peer conference." During this time, the students are allowed to check notes and confer with one another 3  in their native languages for understanding of content while learning English. Native language materials are also provided in a variety of proficiency levels. Additionally, the ENL teacher is encouraged to follow the ELA curriculum and implement the CCSS through ENL strategies when planning their lessons. This approach makes it possible for the students to either be introduced or to further their linguistic and academic knowledge in English. Through a free-standing program, the students are exposed to data driven and differentiated instruction lessons which allow them to advance according to their proficiency level. The classroom is equipped with desktops, a smartboard, laptops and a listening center; thus, making it possible for all students to receive instructions according to their needs, language proficiency and learning style. The above described services and resources are grade and age appropriate respectively. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Since, we are co-located with P.S. 156, all of our resources are shared by both schools. We Share one ENL Teacher who services the students of both schools. Additionally, we collaborate with teachers, administrators and staff to ensure that all of the ENLs' needs are met. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). The Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, SLT, PTA members, and ENL teacher invites parents/guardians of ENLs to attend workshops that address the educational needs of ELLs, before, during, and at the end of the school year. The staff makes translators available, disseminate materials and notifications in the home languages of the parents/guardians, and provide information about needed support services. We make parents and ELLs feel welcome by providing food and answering any questions they may have. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We offer Spanish as a language elective to ENLs and all students. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? We do not have a dual language program at this time. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional development for teachers at IS 392 occurs through several channels. Regular professional development sessions facilitated by coaches include strategies for involving ENLs in the mainstream class, as well as methods of scaffolding to make material more accessible. Information distributed at the network level is turn keyed by our ENL teacher. Our ENL teacher has also had the opportunity to attend workshops held throughout the city. This training has also been shared with our staff during grade meetings and professional development sessions.The ENL Coordinator will be able to provide overviews for all teachers, guidance counselors, secretaries, and the parent coordinator, and includes the following topics: how the ENL/bilingual placement process works, steps to take if you suspect language acquisition is an issue for one of your students, an introduction to ENL methodologies, strategies that can be immediately implemented in the monolingual classroom, and specific writing errors ELL students often make. 4  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Professional development sessions that include strategies for involving ENLs in the mainstream class, as well as methods of scaffolding to make material more accessible.Additionally, we will be providing workshops in Math and ELA incorporating ENL strategies that will assist the ELL population academically.Professional development for teachers at IS 392 occurs through several channels. Regular professional development sessions facilitated by coaches include strategies for involving ELLs in the mainstream class, as well as methods of scaffolding to make material more accessible. Information distributed at the network level is turn keyed by our ENL teacher. Our ENL teacher has also had the opportunity to attend workshops held throughout the city. This training has also been shared with our staff during grade meetings and professional development sessions.Our ELL Coordinator will provide background training for all teachers, assistant principals, the bilingual/ENL coordinator, guidance counselors, secretaries, and the parent coordinator, and includes the following topics: how the ENL/bilingual placement process works, steps to take if you suspect language acquisition is an issue for one of your students, an introduction to ENL methodologies, strategies that can be immediately implemented in the monolingual classroom, and specific writing errors ENL students often make. We will also be offering professional development: September-June 2018 -2019*Data Analysis*Looking at Student work*Common Core Learning Standards- looking at the shifts*Integrating the Common Core Standards with ELLs Additionally, we will be providing workshops in math, writing ,teacher effectiveness and Language Power which are all programs that will be used with the ELL population and by the ENL teacher. All of these professional development activities will aid in raising teacher practice as well as allowing our school and staff in becoming aligned with the Chancellor's initiatives. In addition all our funding resources will be combined to supplement our ENL program. The agendas and sign in sheets for all professional developments are maintained and tracked by the Principal and School Secretary. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? During our Parent Engagement time on Tuesdays, the parents of ENLs are invited to come in for a one on one meeting to discuss their child's goals, developmental progress and language proficiency amongst other topics. Provisions for interpretation and translation will be provided by the Translation Department services over the phone, as well as by staff. We also have Student Led Conferences 3 times per year. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. ENL parents support their children by participating in school activities such as "Dads Bring your Child to School Day", Career Day, showcases by the students, art galleries by the students, PTA meetings, as well as Student Led Conferences, Workshops on how to help your child with homework, Family math and reading night, sip and chat with the principal, and other family engagement activities. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 5  6 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Ingrid Joseph, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 7  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: I.S. 392 School DBN: 23K392 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Ingrid Joseph Title Principal Loren Cooper Assistant Principal Nerissa Conway Parent Coordinator Claudia Morales ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Jillian Palazzolo/Spanish Teacher/Subject Area N/A Samantha Phillips-VargasRashid Miatheresa Pate Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/07/18 9/07/18 9/07/18 9/07/18 9/07/18 9/07/18 9/07/18 8  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 23K392 School Name: I.S. 392 Superintendent: M. Pate The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Nerissa Geiselle Conway Fauntleroy Parent Coordinator School Secretary Yes No No No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We use the data from home language surveys, blue cards, and we conduct a survey to find out additional information about students and parents. As a team we go over the data and make decisions about how best to meet the needs of the community as it pertains to language and translation 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 9  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish English Chinese Hatian Creole 19 366 5 1 4.79 92.19 1.26 0.25 18 366 5 1 4.53 92.19 1.26 0.25 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. English Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Media Release Forms Behavioral Contracts Student orientation handbook, September September September Parent Handbook, Beginning of Year Surveys, Parent Newsletters, Monthly Calendars, School Closing Notices, Holidays, September September Parent Teacher Conferences Monthly Trip Slips, Monthly September-June After School Program Applications, September-June Testing Notices, Report Cards Progress Reports September, November, March, May Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Provided by DOE Provided By DOE Selected documents will be translated to Spanish in house by our Spanish teacher and other Spanish speaking staff who have volunteered to do this work. Some documents are readily translated by the DOE under Tanslated Documents. Free translation services for schools and offices LACs will arrange for all documents to be translated 0  September-June September, May April, May, June November, March, May Letters from the Chancellor September-June Provided by DOE 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings September-June Meet the Teacher Parent Teacher Conferences Monthly SLT Meetings Parent Orientations Weekly Parent Engagement meetings Phone calls High School Matriculation Graduation parent meetings Academic probation meetings Promotional Meetings Parent Orientations June, September How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)?    Free translation services for schools and offices Free over-the-phone interpretation for schools and offices Free on-site interpretation for offices LACs will arrange for all translation and interpretation services   Free translation services for schools and offices Free over-the-phone 1  interpretation for schools and offices Free on-site interpretation for offices  LACs will arrange for all translation and interpretation services 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. I.S. 392 will communicate with all families early in the school year to ensure that we have the best phone numbers and methods of contacting parents in the event of an emergency or a need to share academic or behavior issues with parents. If a family is found to be limited- English proficient, we will use our staff who have volunteered to help with this work. Those staff members will be alerted in the event of an emergency or a need to interpret information so that parents understand the expectations fully and can act as an advocate for their child. If we do not have staff that speak the language of the parent, we will use the over the phone interpretation services provided by the DOE. In September, school staff will be trained in how to use the over the phone translation system as well as how to secure on-site interpretation services for our school. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. LACs will attend professional development at the beginning of the year and this PD will be turn keyed to the entire staff in faculty meetings. The info will also be shared with SLT and PA. Additional training will be provided through additional turn keyed PD as provided by the field support center as an ongoing expectation to meet the language access needs of our families. Staff will be given memos and resources to help facilitate the understanding and use of language access resources. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Translated versions of Parent Bill of Rights and Family Guides are distributed (in the beginning of the school year and/or at registration) to those parents that are non-English dominant, based on their Home Language Survey. 2  Information and signage will be shared and posted on school website, social media sites, as well as at SLT and PA Meetings. Language Access posters in different languages will be posted throughout the school. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will be looking at and discussing Parent Surveys during School Leadership Team Meetings, PA Meetings and by talking regularly to parents, teachers, and students. We will use the feedback to improve our communication and ensure that we adhere to our plans to help our parents in their own language in order to serve them better. 3 
