 22K405 School Name: MIDWOOD HIGH SCHOOL Principal: MICHAEL MCDONNELL   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Midwood High School 332200011405 9-12 School Number (DBN): 22K405 2839 Bedford Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11210 718-724-8500 Phone Number: 718-724-8515 Fax: Michael McDonnell mmcdonn2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Michael McDonnell Conrad Boyd Ursula Edwards Michael McDonnell Ursula Edwards Olga Lisker Sarah Shahin N/A District Information Geographical District: 22 Michael Prayor Superintendent: 6565 FlatlandsAvenue Room 112 Superintendent’s Office Address: Brooklyn, NY 11236 mprayor@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-290-8675 Phone Number: 718-290-8690 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Brooklyn South FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 415 89 th Street, Brooklyn, NY CWatson21@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-759-4875 Phone Number: 718-759-3909 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Michael McDonnell Conrad Boyd Ursula Edwards Sandra Barrett UrsulaEdwards OlgaLisker Sara Shahin FahimaAktherHaque Kathy Ene Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Natasha Harris Jennifer Impoco Ali Ince Juana Villalobos Marcia Kaufman Fannie Daniels Gloria Aklipi JenessaKornaker Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent/Alternate Member/ Assistant Principal/ CSA Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission is to ensure that all students are challenged academically, supported socially and emotionally, and prepared for college and/or careers upon graduation.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Midwood High School is a large successful public high school that currently serves over 4000 students. The school is composed of a neighborhood program (Liberal Arts and Sciences), the Humanities Institute and the Medical Science program. To meet student needs we have incorporated several types of supports. Our two gifted programs offer an educational experience BEYOND the requirements of an advanced Regents diploma. Students in our LASI program are offered entrance into the Honors academy based on academic strength. These students are prepped to ensure an Advanced Regents diploma upon graduation. The other students in the LASI cohorts are given access to our CTE programs. These CTE programs (Robotics, Law and Media Arts) provide opportunities for students to gain experience for a possible career in one of these areas. We also partner with several CBO’s (CAMBA, Strive for College) to assist in college placement and preparation. We also provide two full time college counselors to support all students through the college application process. Since we are a large high school, we feel we have several key strengths. Our demographic data shows that we are an inclusive, diverse school (35% Asian, 31% African-American and 22% White). This diversity is readily evident and promotes differing viewpoints and provides the cultural richness needed for true academic growth. Our large student body also allows us to offer a very large course catalog that challenges and provides engagement for all students. We can also provide the typical “suburban” high school experience. We hold plays, musicals, science fairs , model congress and countless other events in the school year. We also have one of the largest sport programs in the New York City Department of Education. We have been chosen as a Silver Award winner by US News and World Report, a "Best High School" award by Niche.com and The New York Post and a "Rigorous high school by the Washington Post. We also have a nationally renown Science research program and sent one student (out of 14 students from New York City) this year to the International Science and Engineering Fair. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Midwood has nearly 12% Students with Disabilities and around 7% ENL students. Students in these programs need Extended Learning Time opportunities as well as targeted Regents support. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. A. Rigorous Instruction Area of Growth 1. During the past school year we focused on the new curriculum changes that were implemented in Social Studies. Our Global Regents exams and our US History exams have shown incredible jumps in student passing rates. Area of Focus 1. We will look to modify student programming, teaching methods and use of instructional technology in the Algebra 1 curriculum. 0  B. Supportive Environment Area of Growth 1. Students with IEP's were provided with extended testing hours so that they were able to get their extended time requirements without missing instruction. Area of Focus 1. We will focus on using instructional technology in the classroom to provide students with supports needed for rigorous instruction. C. Collaborative Teachers Area of Growth 1. Teacher teams showed continued growth in the 2017-2018 school year. Area of Focus: 1. We plan to use veteran teachers to support newer teachers in classrooms with large numbers of struggling students. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 22K405 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 4058 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 81 89 14 83 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 42 24 27 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 75.0% % Attendance Rate 66.5% % Reduced Lunch 3.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 12.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 22.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.22 1% 11% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 95% 91% 87.9% 54.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YES YES YSH YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YSH YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YES YES No N/A 238 231 23 92.9% 8.1% 10.9% 27.3% 35.7% 2.5% 22 6% 7.4 N/A N/A 95% 92% 95.3% 62% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A YES YES YES N/A N/A YES YES YES N/A N/A YES 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School has Next Generation Learning aligned instruction in Math and ELA (rated Effective in PPO visits and 2018 Quality Review). Social Studies curriculum has undergone significant review and updating to align it to the new Social Studies standards. Science curriculum has begun to prepare for the integration of new NYS Science standards in upcoming school years. Internal measures of academic rigor (using the Cognitive Rigor Matrix) have shown improvements in many classrooms over the past school year. Significant in creases in student performance in Global History, American History and Algebra II noted on June 2018 Regents exams. Algebra 1 was noted as an area of concern due to Regents exam grades in June 2018. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, student performance on Algebra Regents examination will increase by 3% to 5% based on the use of an individualized data collection tool (ALEKS). 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers and Administrators in Math, ELA, Science, Special education and ESL will work cooperatively this summer to update curriculum to align with current/expected New York State and common core standards for all students including SWD's and ELL's. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students 7/15/18 to Assistant Principals, 05/30/19 Principal, Teachers Teachers 10/1/18 to 5/30/19 Assistant Principals, Instructional technology will be identified and deployed in Earth Science, Global History and Algebra 1 classes to support student learning and achievement in these areas. All teachers 9/15/18 to 5/30/19 Teachers AP Social Studies, AP Sciences AP Math, Social Studies, Math and Science Teachers Algebra 1 classrooms will use instructional technology to identify student needs and outcomes at the individual level and use that information to drive instruction. Algebra 1 9/15/19 to 5/30/19 Math AP, Math teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Principal breakfast sessions (four times per year) will focus on instruction and support. Parents will receive monthly newsletters around the way in which they can support their children at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A 4  X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 1, 2019, classroom midterm data in Algebra 1 will show an increase in student performance when compared to the June 2018 school results. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Benchmark exams, January Regents exams Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Recent Quality Review rated us “Proficient” in this category. Recently available school survey results indicate tat 68% of students claim that their teachers ask difficult questions. 57% of students say that teachers help them catch up if they are behind. 54%of students say that teachers notice if they have trouble learning something. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 the number of students who feel that their teachers provide individual support will increase by 5% as measured by these questions on the 2018-2019 School Survey Report due to the use of two teachers in non ICT classrooms. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). School will hire additional guidance counselors and a staff member who is responsible for ensuring that SITH students are supported academically and socially. School will lower teacher-student ratio in classes where academically struggling students are found thus increasing the attention and support that each student receives in the classroom. Additional books and supplies will also be used in those classrooms School will provide opportunities for students to take "pre AP courses" in the spring term. These courses will prepare typical academically struggling students, ELL students, students with disabilities and SITH students to gain the background knowledge needed to be accepted into an AP course for the following term. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All SITH 09/15/18 to 06/28/19 AP Guidance students Students who have been identified as struggling academically 09/07/18to 06/15/19 Assistant Principals of Math, Science, Social Studies and ELA ELL's, Former ELL's, SITH, SWD and Level 1 and Level 2 students 02/05/19 to 05/30/19 AP Supervision (Math, Science, Social Studies and Science) School will implement a lateness deterrent program to identify students who are habitually late to class and provide targeted guidance supports and involve parents to change behavior. Students late to first class of the day 10/01/18 to 5/30/19 Ap Security, Ap Guidance, Deans 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. 7  Conferences will be held at the start of the school year. Principal breakfasts will focus on fostering a supportive environment. Information will also be disseminated via the school website, Pupilpath portal and school mailings. AP Administration, Principal and AP Guidance will be responsible Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Student workbooks, per session postings, computer analysis, Skedula, Naviance Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, internal surveys of student opinions will show an increase of 3% to 5% in similar questions modeled after the School Survey report. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Number of students late to school, internal benchmark exams Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The vast majority of teachers were rated Effective or Highly Effective in their MOTP ratings for the 2018-2019 school year. Recent School Survey results indicate a need for better professional development opportunities. Advance data shows that average grade in 4e (Teacher growth and professional development) at 3.12 out of 4.00 Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the number of teachers responding positively in the 2019 School survey (under collaborative teachers) in questions regarding professional development will increase by 5%. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? School will purchase and implement the use of online All teachers 10/01/18 to Principal, 5/31/19 professional development opportunities for teachers using the Assistant Principals TEQ-PD platform School will use compensatory time positions to allow veteran highly effective teachers the ability to assist their struggling colleagues. 09/01/18 to 11/03/19 Teachers All teachers who have been rated developing or ineffective In classroom with large numbers of struggling students, highly All teachers 10/15/18 to Principal 5/30/19 effective, tenured teachers will support untenured teachers by co-teaching with them. Teacher teams will meet during professional periods throughout Majority of teachers 10/01/18 to 50/30/19 AP Supervision the day to work on assessment based teams. Teams will be aligned by academic department. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. School will hold several evening meetings (College Fair in October, AP Informational Fair in February) to highlight opportunities for parents, students and teachers. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per-session, TEQ PD computer training platform, comp time positions 0  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Advance teacher ratings will show an increase of 3% in component 4e when compared to ratings from June 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance teacher ratings, component 4e, internal survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In the most recent Quality Review, school received a "developing" in component 3.1 (Establishing a coherent vision of school improvement that is reflected in a short list of focused, data based goals.....). School received a "proficient" in all other areas except assessment. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, a set of coherent, data based goals will be used to measure school improvement as seen by a 3 - 5% increase in positive responses in the Effective School Leadership portion of the 2019 School survey. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ● Each department will work with staff to measure All teachers 10/15/18 to AP Supervisions 5/15/19 student work products three times in the school year ● Teachers will be sent to professional development Select Teachers 09/16/18 to 06/15/19 AP Guidance opportunities outside of the building to expand on AP Supervision their pedagogy ● 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Students will use Hess's Cognitive rigor matrix in a modified form. Principal breakfasts will be used to introduce the idea of rigor to parents and show examples. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session, mandatory professional development period twice per month Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant X X Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 3  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019, all teachers will have created an assessment and used it to collect and analyze data with the purpose of identifying opportunities to improve instruction. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher team minutes, presentations at the end of inquiry cycles Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. ● Preliminary data from the Framework for Great Schools report indicates that parent involvement in the school is the main area where growth is needed. ● School has resources to contact parents (web page, phone messenger, “app”, etc) ● Parents are familiar with Pupil path (student grades and data). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, the school will increase collaborative partnership with families and community organizations, as measured by a 3 to 5% increase in agree or strongly agreed by parents in the School Culture section of the New York City School Survey. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Principal will administer a series of monthly meetings (Breakfast with the Principal) for parents around various school-wide initiatives. These meetings will be available online as a live meeting or in an archived format. College and Career office will develop meetings with college acceptance officers regarding acceptance policies at various colleges. We will develop a Microsoft certification opportunity for parents in the Spring term of 2017. We will open 15 spots for a series of workshops that will prepare parents to take the Microsoft Certified Learning exams for professional certifications. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents 10/01/18 to 5/15/19 Principal Parents and students 9/15/18 to 3/15/19 AP Guidance Parents and students 9/15/18 to 5/30/19 Parent Coordinator Guidance department will offer intensive college application preparation program for students and parents. Parents and Students 10/05/18 to 5/01/19 AP Guidance 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Materials for "Breakfast with the Principal" , college office supplies and paper, fee to support the web page and the "Midwood High School" "app", software to "live stream" the meeting. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 6  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 50% of planned events will have occurred and an internal survey regarding parental outreach will be developed and administered to show progress towards goal completion. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Internal survey of parents Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students in 9 th and 10 th grade are given a year end assessment based on the CCLS. Information about student performance is collected and used in subsequent years. Students are placed in appropriate classes based on assessment outcome Freshmen in mathematics classes are scheduled based on 8 th grade math scores. Subsequent math classes are based on student performance, desire and teacher recommendation. Science Science students who are struggling are identified based on performance and teacher recommendation Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Students are focused on reading and writing. They keep journals and portfolios of their work and teacher feedback and most of their work is based upon regents based questions. School provides differentiated algebra and geometry tracks for struggling math learners. Teachers utilize various online resources including programs through RevolutionK12, KHAN academy, JMAP and regentsprep.org. The focus is on getting the students proficient with conceptual understanding. School offers a four term Living Environment class for struggling science learners. The course builds science literacy Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) In class, via differentiated instruction by way of small groups. Tutoring is provided in multiple formats including peer tutoring as well as teacher tutoring. Students are utilizing Achieve 3000 as a primary online resource. In class, via differentiated instruction by way of small groups. Tutoring is provided in multiple formats including peer tutoring as well as teacher tutoring. Students are utilizing RevolutionK12 as a primary online resource. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Most of these services are provided during the school day with additional teacher tutoring taking place both after and before school. Students are also provided access to various online resources which they can use from home, etc. Most of these services are provided during the school day with additional teacher tutoring taking place both after and before school. Students are also provided access to various on-line resources which they can use from home, etc. In class via differentiated instruction by way of small groups. Tutoring is provided in multiple formats Most of these services are provided during the school day with additional teacher tutoring taking place both 8 after 1 st marking period grades. Social Studies Students who are struggling are identified based on performance and teacher recommendation after 1 st marking period grades. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Counselors keep track of student performance using Skedula, ATS and teacher referrals including peer tutoring as well as teacher tutoring. Earth Science struggling students are scheduled for AIS one period per week. after and before school. Students are also provided access to various on-line resources which they can use from home, etc. In class via differentiated instruction by way of small groups. Tutoring is provided in multiple formats including peer tutoring as well as teacher tutoring. Individual and small group counseling is provided to at-risk students. Most of these services are provided during the school day with additional teacher tutoring taking place both after and before school. Students are also provided access to various on-line resources which they can use from home, etc. Counselors are available throughout the entire school day and there are additional after school supports four days per week. for students and prepares them for the rigors of living environment and earth science. Struggling science learners can also access our self-review program, which is a computer-based model of support that students can use in school during a free period. Students are focused on argumentative writing by using primary source documents and graphic organizers. The school is infusing the use of IPads into classes with struggling learners as a means of supporting motivation, access to primary source documents and on-line tutorials. Guidance counselors teach a social emotional learning class. Guidance counselors lead our Big Brother and Big Sister programs. These programs provide at-risk students with academic, organizational and social and emotional supports. Counselors conference with students routinely and our crisis management team is always on call. 9  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 160 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Clothing, school supplies, planners, calculators, etc... Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 0  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 1  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Almost all teachers at Midwood High School are "Highly Qualified". Prospective teachers will be vetted by using current teaching staff to view resumes and be on hiring committees. Teacher retention is currently over 95%. High quality professional development will be provided to all teachers. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). School will use full day professional development opportunities to allow teachers to work in collaborative groups guided by assistant principals. Teachers will be sent out to quality professional development opportunities that have been identified by assistant principals. School will pay teachers and assistant principals to create their own professional development opportunities and offer them to other staff after school hours. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 2  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. All benchmark exams in Math, Science, Social Studies and ELA are teacher developed. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) X N/A N/A X X Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 2,473,094 N/A N/A 15,694 22,311,727 X N/A N/A X X 1Explanation/Background: 3  Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities 4  funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 5  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Midwood High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. [Midwood High School] will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 6  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 7  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) [Midwood High School] , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 8  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 9  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 0  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 1  ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 3  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Rationale: Midwood High School has developed a successful before & after-school program to serve ELL/Bilingual students. The skill-building components will include instructional aspects that our data continue to show are most needed by ELL students. We looked at the results of the Regents examinations in all subject areas, the component breakdown of the NYSESLAT exam, as well as the grades received on report cards for subject area classes. We also conduct ongoing informal meetings with subject area teachers and the ENL guidance counselor in order to gain further input as to the needs of the students. After evaluating all test data and professional input from teachers, we determined that our students would greatly benefit from continued and sustained support in reading, academic vocabulary acquisition, writing, content area support, conversational skills, and college readiness and preparation. This will allow students to have an increased level of confidence in their new language, will provide them the skills needed to perform well in their academic subject area classes and Regents exams, and will help them prepare for the transition to higher education and careers. We also determined that a small group of students designated as academically at risk and SIFE will have additional meeting time with the ENL teachers so that they can become technologically proficient while boosting literacy skills. In order to improve the students’ technological ability while fostering and enhancing academic skills, they will partake in the creation of an ENL Newsletter that will be shared with the entire school community. The instructional skill building components will include academic vocabulary that will support all content areas, reading-decoding skills, writing skills, and conversational skill-building exercises. Students will also receive support to become technologically proficient as they gain computer skills necessary for their present and future academic success as they seek to enter college. They will receive extra support to boost academic success in ELA, math, science, and technology skills during the week. Students will produce an ENL Newsletter to be published 4 times per year, as they put into practice their newly developed and supported technological skills. As part of the additional support in social studies and science, students will also have the opportunity to take trips and explore academically relevant venues in NYC such as the Lower East Side Tenement Museum, Brooklyn Museum, New York Historical Society, and New York Public Library. The ENL instruction will use a combination of Quality Teaching for English Language Learners approach and the SIOP model, both of which are supported by scientifically based research. By being aware of and targeting the specific needs of our students, we will be able to support them as they improve their academic vocabulary as well as their literacy skills in general. On Saturdays, an Assistant Principal will be on-site at least one-half hour before the program starts to ensure safety and security for all in the program, to greet students and parents, meet with parents to discuss student's progress and needs as well as to support parents' needs, and ensure a safe dismissal. During the 2018-2019 school year, we will also expand our offerings by bringing in a teaching artist from the Educational Video Center (EVC) to teach our ELLs how to script, film, and edit short videos in the target language. The EVC artist will work alongside our ESOL teachers to 4  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information utilize appropriate methodologies that facilitate students' acquisition of English along with the requisite technical skills. The EVC program will be paid for from another school budget, so the only costs to the Title III program will be teacher per session and supplies. The Assistant Principal will arrange for Metrocards for participating students and facilitate access to necessary equipment such as computers, printers, and cameras. Instruction will be provided by Midwood's licensed ESOL teachers and a licensed bilingual social studies teacher. Instruction will take place before school, after school, and on selected Saturdays to improve English, math, science, social studies, and technological skills in order to support ELLs' academic vocabulary and oral proficiency; this in turn, will support their improvement in the classroom as well as the Regents exams in English, Social Studies, Mathematics, and Sciences. Subgroups and grade levels to be served: Current ELL students who are at risk from 9th, 10th, 11th, and 12th grades at all levels of proficiency will be served. Special small SIFE Advisory groups will support ELA by using Read 180 and Newsela, and will develop technical skills by partaking in the creation of the ENL Newsletter. Parents are formally invited and welcomed to any session, after school or on Saturday, to visit and observe student work at any time. Schedule and Duration: The program will run after school on Tuesdays, Wednesdays, and Thursdays, as well as on selected Saturdays starting on December 4th and ending June 13th. Weekday sessions will meet before and after school, depending on teacher availability, from 8:00 - 8:45 AM and 2:45 - 5:35 PM. Saturday dates will support classroom units by doing field trips to pertinent venues and will run from 4-5 hours. Language of Instruction: Classes will be held in English. ENL techniques and methodologies for the acquisition of English for English Language Learners will be used. A bilingual Haitian Creole teacher will be available to support lower performing students who speak Haitian-Creole, using bilingual teaching techniques. # and licenses of teachers involved: There will be three licensed ESOL teachers and one licensed bilingual social studies teacher in the program. Types of Materials to be used: ENL, English, global studies, mathematics, and science books , as well as other materials such as SAT and Regents review workbooks, are already in our curriculum from previous years and will be used at no additional cost to the program. However, some additional and/or updated copies of these books will need to be purchased. We will use technological resources such as Read 180 and Newsela, also at no cost to the program. There will be hands-on activities as the technology aspect for the SIFE advisory will work on the making of the newsletter. We will need to purchase printing toner and paper to enable our students to produce the ENL Newsletter. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: 5  Part C: Professional Development n order to ensure that our ENL teachers keep up with the latest TESOL/ESOL methodologies and techniques they will attend workshops provided by the office of DELLSS, NYU-RBERN, Fordham-RBERN, and Long Island RBERN. Teachers to receive training Mr. Pinsky ( ENL Teacher), Ms. Williams (ENL Teacher), Ms. Volcy (Bilingual Teacher), Ms. Goodwin (ENL teacher) Schedule and duration Professional Development workshops will occur throughout the year on a monthly basis. Topics to be covered The topics to be covered during these workshops are the integration of ELL instructional concepts and methodologies in all subject areas, in order to better support English acquisition as well as increase subject matter knowledge . Other topics will be: planning for Regents and how subject area teachers can support the ELL students to be successful in these exams; looking beyond high school as graduating L's look forward to college. Name of provider Mr. Max Pinsky, ENL Teacher, Ms. Shakira Williams, ENL Teacher, and Ms. Maria Moccia, English teacher, will conduct in-house workshops. The Office of DELLSS, Fordham University, NYU and other professional institutions will provide outside PD. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: Midwood High School encourages as much parent involvement as possible, especially with at-risk groups, including SIFE students. We have a number of students who may benefit from constant home contact and we provide translation services to those parents. We have set aside Fridays to communicate with parents as a routine action, this provides parents with ongoing communication and supports us in addressing our students academic, emotional and social needs. We also make use of our web page to keep parents informed of our schedules and activities. We also encourage a positive attitude towards education and attending school programs that increase academic achievement. Therefore, even though the parents of our students are always welcome in our classroom, we have scheduled days that parents are formally invited to come to Midwood and watch their children's work and discuss their individual needs, as their children look forward to passing regent exams, graduation and college. Schedule and Duration: There are four scheduled parent days planned: October 15 (5:00-6:30), December 8 (10-12:00), March 2 (10-12:00) and June 1 (10-12:00). Topics to be Covered: 6  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities The topics to be covered during these meetings will be: Understanding the Services Available at Midwood High School and NYC DOE to Help You and Your Child Be Sucessful, How to Help your Child at Home, How to Use Midwood High School's website, Getting to know the NYSESLAT exam, New York State Requirements for Graduation, College and options for future education, FAFSA and financial Aid for higher education, Celebrating our children's work at Midwood. Name of Provider: Max Pinsky (ENL Teacher), Shakira Williams (ENL Teacher), Marie Volcy (Bilingual Teacher), Mardee Goodwin (ENL Teacher), Kendra Lane (ENL Guidance Counselor), Mindy Osansky (Special Education / ENL Guidance Counselor) How parents will be notified of these activities: Parents will be called on the phone by native language speaking paras, teachers or translation service. Invitations will also be backpacked home with students with dates, times, and programs. These date will also be posted on the school's website. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 7  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 8  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 22 School Name MIDWOOD HIGH SCHOOL Borough Brooklyn School Number 405 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal MICHAEL MCDONNELL Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher MAX PINSKY Teacher/Subject Area MARI VOLCY, SOCIAL STUDIES Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider MINDY OSANSKY Superintendent MICHAEL PRAYOR Assistant Principal M. TERESA FERNANDEZ Coach type here School Counselor KENDRA LANE Parent SKHY LOBIANCO-BOASI Parent Coordinator CAROL ARDITO Field Support Center Staff Member CHRISTINE ETIENNE Other (Name and Title) JOEY PAVONE, ENL TEACHER C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 4 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 2 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 2 D. Student Demographics 9  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 4018 Total number of ELLs 123 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 3.06% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) NA NA NA NA Program TBE TBE TBE DL Lang. NA NA NA NA K 1 2 3 4 5 NA NA NA NA NA NA 0 6 NA NA NA NA NA NA 0 7 NA NA NA NA NA NA 0 8 NA NA NA NA NA NA 0 9 NA NA NA NA NA NA 0 10 NA NA NA NA NA NA 0 11 NA NA NA NA NA NA 0 12 NA NA NA NA NA NA 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 NA NA NA NA NA NA 0 NA NA NA NA NA NA 0 NA NA NA NA NA NA 0 NA NA NA NA NA NA 0 NA NA NA NA NA NA 0 NA NA NA NA DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Teachers assess early literacy skills using reading and writing teacher created assessments, that give them insight into the four language skills. In addition to the teacher created assessments, we also use the ELL Periodic Assessments, to ascertain the language and syntax level of the student, and their readiness to move ahead on the spring NYSESLAT. Information from these exams provides insight into the student’s ability in the areas of decoding, syntax, comprehension, and vocabulary usage. Based on the latest periodic assessment results students achieving 75-100% correct were as follows: 9 th grade, 43.9%; 10 th grade, 75.9%; 11 th grade 61.1%; 12 th grade, 70%. An item analysis of the answers demonstrated the need for support of ELL9-12.3.8, as only 40% of 12 th graders, 50% of 11 th graders, 59% of 10 th graders and 44% of 9 th graders were 0 able to reach that standard. Furthermore, upon analysis of answers, the following was highlighted:30% of 12 th graders; 50% of 11 th graders; 55% of 10 th graders and 54% of 9 th graders, reached ELL9-12.1.15. Both of the said standards have a direct correlation, since both are related to the ability to develop stragtegies in written and oral language so that students may be able to adjust presenation and language production to effectively express opinions and evaluations, as well as the ability to use and produce language for different genres- debates, speeches, presentations, etc. This informs our instruction around types of materials, genres, and activities that will be presented in our classses. Students will work with speeches, debates and real life articles dealing with all types of written word and situations that will support both said standards. Skill building in all language modalities will support the classroom experience, so that students may also build and improve their oral language skills throughout the year. Furthermore, ELL teachers of students whose literacy skills are not well developed provide independent reading support throughout the year to further develop students’ literacy skills. Books reflecting CCLStandards are made availble to our students to meet their needs at all levels. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Students will work with speeches, debates and real life articles dealing with all types of written word and situations that will support both said standards. Skill building in all language modalities will support the classroom experience, so that students may also build and improve their oral language skills throughout the year. Furthermore, ELL teachers of students whose literacy skills are not well developed provide independent reading support throughout the year to further develop students’ literacy skills. Books reflecting CCLStandards are made availble to our students to meet their needs at all levels. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate our programs for ELLs using graduation data: which includes graduation rate, acquisition of advanced Regents and regular Regents diplomas, timely progress towards graduation, periodic assessment data, NYSESLAT modality progress, success on Regents exams, college admission rates and overall student growth. We also evaluate individual performance, taking into account students’ social-emotional growth and well-being, in order to assess accurate placement and the need to adjust student placement when necessary. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We evaluate our programs for ELLs using graduation data: which includes graduation rate, acquisition of advanced Regents and regular Regents diplomas, timely progress towards graduation, periodic assessment data, NYSESLAT modality progress, success on Regents exams, college admission rates and overall student growth. We also evaluate individual performance, taking into account students’ social-emotional growth and well-being, in order to assess accurate placement and the need to adjust student placement when necessary. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Upon analysis of the NYSESLAT & NYSITELL students who enter our ENL program in the ninth grade quickly advance to the next level by the tenth grade, and by eleventh grade most of them have achieved either Expanding or Commanding on the NYSESLAT. A large percentage of our ninth graders come to us with Expanding or Commonading scores in the Listening and Speaking modalities, but with Emerging, Transitioning, or Expanding scores for Reading and Writing. Since our school’s population of ELLs come from the area middle schools, and we received very few over-the-counter students in the past five years, we do not have enough NYSITELL data to support a trend analysis. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Caninet meetings, Departmental Professional Development, Instructional cabinet, ENL newsletter 1  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. As per CR Part 154.2, ENL instruction is delivered in standalone ENL and Integrated ENL / content area classes. Students in both standalone and integrated ENL courses are programmed according to grade level, taking into account the new rule regarding the maximum of two contiguous grade levels in a class; therefore, students are grouped in heterogeneous groupings (mixed proficiency levels). Classes do not travel together, as students at high school level are programmed individually to fit their educational individual needs. Entering and Emerging students are programmed in our standalone ENL class, which is taught by an ENL teacher, as per CR Part 154. All of our ELL students are also programmed in integrated ENL / content classes. Our integrated classes, in which students are grouped heterogeneously, are centered around ELA and Living Environment. Each class is co-taught by a content area teacher and an ENL teacher. We believe that this model provides our students with the professional knowledge and pedagogy of the subject area teacher as well as the support of the ENL teacher to scaffold and integrate ENL methodologies. Materials used in these classes include, but are not limited to, grammar textbooks, reading anthologies, picture dictionaries, novels, lab manuals, visual aids, computer aided learning, iPads, Commmon Core aligned content area textbooks, other authentic reading materials specifically designed for ELLs, adaptations of classic works of literature, and full length plays and novels. Students at all levels are given the opportunity to practice all four skills of listening, speaking, reading and writing through the use of these materials. Students are provided with a library of reading resources differentiated by level and the Footprints Reading Collection, an online and e-reader program. Students use these resources to develop literacy skills, including the acquisition of vocabulary, an understanding of academic vocabulary relevant to the discussion of literature, and the opportunity to read and write about literature in both English and the native language. Students also use Newsela, an online program, to support and differentiate multiple reading levels. As pupils become more proficient in English, they are asked to write paragraphs and essays, prepare and present oral presentations and presentations using Smart Board and Power Point technology, and prepare group projects and presentations. Teachers of ENL coordinate with cooperating teachers in integrated classes, as well as with subject teachers in general, during common planning to share strategies and methodologies appropriate for teaching content to ELLs. Specific content support in all levels of ENL is provided by ENL teachers. Students at the Transitioning, Expanding and Commanding levels of ENL are provided with preparation and support for the ELA Regents Exam. Social studies, ELA, Science and ENL teachers run joint after school enrichment and Regents preparation programs throughout the year. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Students at the Entering level are programmed for one unit of standalone ENL and 2 units of integrated ENL / content instruction. Each class meeets for 45 minutes per day, 5 days per week for a total of 675 minutes per week. Students at the Emerging level are programmed for one standalone ENL class and one integrated ENL / ELA or Living Environment class. Each class meets 45 minutes per day, 5 days per week for a total of 450 minutes per week. Students at the Transitioning and Expanding levels are programmed for one integrated ENL/ ELA or Living Environment class. Each class meets 45 minutes per 2  day, 5 days per week for a total of 225 minutes per week. Students at the commanding level are programmed for half a unit of integrated ENL / ELA class in a push-in model of 45 minutes 2 days per week, and a pull-out of 45 minutes once a week for a total of 135 minutes per week. Specific content support in all levels of ENL is provided by ENL teachers. Students at the Transitioning, Expanding and Commanding levels of ENL are provided with preparation and support for the ELA Regents. ELA, Social Studies and ENL teachers run joint after-school / Saturday enrichment and Regents preparation programs throughout the year. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. We provide differentiated instruction in all classes, with ELL students given content area tasks related to the general curriculum with language supports in English – picture dictionaries, increased use of visual aids and computer-based instruction, and graphs, charts and pairing with non-ELL students, whenever appropriate. We provide a variey of ways to assess student learning that can support English language development and content are knowledge: a project-based learning and portfolio assessments, provide students with the opportunity to demonstrate content knowledge through a variety of manners, such as multimedia projects, student-led conferences, and podcasting that demands both content engagement and repetition of language. Both portfolios and project based learning are guided and assessed under the CCLS, using rubrics and checklist to guide students' work. Teachers in the ENL program use the communicative approach in second language acquisition, implementation of the Balanced Literacy model, cooperative learning activities, paired activities, use of the writing process, project based learning, visual aides, readings in literature, classroom libraries, videos, and other strategies which foster language development. In order to make content comprehensible, content area teachers, supported by their ENL cooperating teachers, use PowerPoint and Smart Notebook with visual representations of concepts to make the information accessible across language skills. Subjec area teachers organize delivery of content in a sequential and scaffolded manner, building upon previous knowledge to reach mastery of the concepts as well as academic vocabulary. Students are given direct instruction in note taking and study skills, as well as organizational skills via the AVID program. In the ENL program, content area teachers use the same common Core-aligned materials as that of the English speaking population counterpart. However, the delivery of scaffolded materials is linguistically modified to make content comprehensible, as described above, through the use of specific language acquisition techniques. Regents course teachers infuse examples of Regents questions for the topic being taught, with the support of the ENL teacher to help with linguistic techniques. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students who are new to our programs are given age-appropriate texts to read and discuss in the native language. Students are also asked to provide a writing sample. Transcripts from the students’ home countries are evaluated by the dedicated ELL guidance counselor to determine level of education in the native language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. As per CR Part 154, we program SIFE students according to parents’ requests into the freestanding ENL, Transitional Bilingual Education, or Dual Language programs. We provide SIFE students with in-class academic supports, such as visually rich examples/ graphs/ grids that allow for the same content but different manner of presentation. We also provide additional academic support via tutoring after school/ before school/Saturday Program. All SIFE studetns are provided access and guidance to computers in the ENL office, so that they can support their lessons/ hw/ assignments. The dedicated ENL Guidance Counselor also provides academic intervention and related support services, such as academic planning, referrals to community support services, Big Brother/Big sister programs and referral services when necessary. In subject areas, SIFE students have specific review sessions after school with teachers to clarify and reinforce material presented in class. They also have access to peer tutoring during the students’ free periods and lunch. During the after-school programs, students work on enhancing reading and writing comprehension skills. Teachers of SIFE students in the content areas meet with ENL teachers on 3  a regular basis to discuss methodolgies for teaching SIFE students and to address the individual needs of all our SIFE students. SIFE students are also enrolled in small group advisories that meet after school in order to promote organizational and study skills, to support social-emotional awareness, and to guide students through the process of accumulating credits and preparing for college. These opportunities afford our SIFE students extended instructional time in order to integrate language and literacy development along with content area knowledge. b. We provide our newcomers with academic support and additional tutoring after-school / Saturday program. In order to ensure that ELLs in this group are prepared for ELA testing, students use this time to develop literacy skills including the acquisition of vocabulary, an understanding of academic vocabulary relevant to the discussion of literature and current events, and the opportunity to write about literature in both English and the native language. We also provide additional support by making software, books, dictionaries, and subject-specific resources available in our ENL Resource Center. Some of the software includes Tell Me More, an interactive computer software program that supports the correct pronunciation of American English, acquisition of vocabulary and grammatical structures. We also offer Newsela that provides audio and video leveled English language acquisition. Additionally, a resource library that encompasses all genres of printed materias is made availe to all ELL students to support their reading development. c. We provide our ELLs who have been receiving service for 4 to 6 years with academic support via our Title III after-school / Saturday program. This program is staffed by both ENL and content area teachers. We continue to provide additional support by making software, books, dictionaries, and subject-specific resources available in our ENL Resource Center, where ENL teachers are available to provide one-to one tutoring. Additionally, we provide Regents preparation and support in all subject areas. Students also have access to our Peer Tutoring Center for additional subject area support. d. We provide our Long-Term ELLs with tutorials in the content areas by licensed Midwood teachers, academic intervention, such as, small group instruction during ENL and TBE programs, and after school individual tutoring, Regents tutoring by ENL teachers, availability of subject area support in the Peer Tutoring Center, and related support services through our guidance department. Teachers and guidance counselors maintain home contact with parents of Long Term ELLs to inform them of progress and support positive communication with the home. In the ENL classrooms, explicit and integrated, long-term ELLs are provided with targeted instruction around all four skills to ensure that they developing English language skills. ELL Periodic Assessments are administered and analyzed twice yearly in order to ensure that areas for growth are addressed throughout the school year and prior to the next administration of the NYSESLAT exam each spring. e. Students reaching commanding level on the NYSESLAT receive at least 90 minutes per week of integrated ENL / content area instruction. These students also have access to after-school and before school tutorials in the content areas, Regents tutoring, college application support, as well as testing accommodations. We provide testing accommodations on all Regents Exams, including separate location and extended time. Students who attain the commanding level on the NYSESLAT are programmed into Midwood's Liberal Arts and Sciences, Humanities, and Medical Science programs, and receive the aforementioned support services as they make this transition. The designated guidance counselor programs all former ELLs and reviews all former ELL students’ programs in order to ensure that these students are on track to fulfill their graduation requirements. Content area assistant principals and teachers are provided with information pertinent to identifying former ELLs and providing them with the appropriate support and mandated testing modifications. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? For ELLs with special needs, we follow the mandates of their particular IEPs. Those students who require Special Education pedagogues for all instruction are provided with a self-contained environment throughout the day, except during ENL classes. In order to accommodate the needs of the students and provide them with the support they need we use computer assisted technology to allow for differentiation and targeted support, our SWD's work with Achieve 3000, Newsela, and Avid in order to accelerate language acquisition as well as support listening skills. This programs supported by their teachers give each student individualized instructional support and strategies, as the programs proceed at the pace of success set by the student's reponses. Other instructuctional strategies, such as rich visual aides is often used. Teachers and paraprofessionals provide differentiated support in content area classes for ELL-SWDs. We also support our special needs with 4  after school programs, Big Brother/Big sister tutors that work one-on-one with students, computer assisted literacy programs, testing accommodations and translation services for parents and guardians. There is one student with alternate placement paraprofessional.Our Alternate Placement Para student is in need of only the supports of the para that is assigned to him as prescribed on his IEPs. When the NYSESLAT is administered, all the students who are scheduled to take the test are provided with the accommodations mandated on their IEP. In addition to the mandated IEP services, the ELLs in our Special Education program are provided with before and after school one-on-one tutoring and small group tutoring at the Peer Tutoring Center and the ENL Resource Center. They are also provided with peer tutoring within the inclusion environment. In the ENL Resource Center and Peer Tutoring Center our students have access to technology and materials such as computers, audio books, leveled books and videos to better support their learning styles and enrich subject knowledge. Teachers in Special Education classes use computer based literacy programs with diagnostics and assessments, including Achieve3000. All related support services such as speech and counseling are also provided. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELL-SWDs are programmed for ENL stand-alone classes or integrated classes, depending on their level of proficiency, thus already providing for every ELL-SWD the least restrictive environment, as all ELL-SWD's are programmed with the rest of their ELL colleagues in the integrated or stand- alone ENL and/ integrated class.. Our Special Education students whose IEPs require native language support are assigned a paraprofessional who accompanies them and assists in the translation of language in the content areas of Math, ELA, Social Studies, and Science. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ELLs are programmed for ENL Integrated classes in Living Environment and ELA. In order to fully support our ELLs in the subgroups of SIFE, newcomers, ELLs receiving services 4-6 years, long term ELLs and students with disabilities, one dedicated guidance counselor continues to meet with content area Assistant Principals in order to discuss programming and placement of ELLs. This year, our ENL teachers and ELA teachers will attend workshops addressing techniques for teaching Common Core aligned material to ELLs. Math teachers will be attending multiple workshops on teaching math to ELLs through their participation in Math for America. As a result of these workshops, teachers are able to better target instruction specifically to the needs of ELLs at all levels in various subject areas. We have daily during/ after school subject area support in small groups and one-on one in Math, Social Studies, Science, ELA, and Languages. All instruction during these group sessions is in English, however, students have at their disposal dictionaries and glossaries pertinent to the subject area at hand. In addition, we make available for all teachers ongoing support from our ENL teachers during professional monthly Common Planning sessions. In ELA, newcomers are supported through one to one support during independent reading where students are provided with a library of reading resources differentiated by level. Students use this time to develop literacy skills, including the acquisition of vocabulary, an understanding of academic vocabulary relevant to the discussion of literature and non-fiction genres. Students receiving services 4 to 6 years are supported through additional literacy instruction through our after-school / Saturday program in which they enhance their writing and oral skills by producing fairy tales and stories that are then presented to an audience of parents, teachers, and peers. Long-Term ELLs are supported through ENL integrated courses to prepare them for the ELA Regents exam, while increasing proficiency in targeted areas of listening, speaking, reading, and writing determined through analysis of NYSESLAT results and ELL Periodic Assessments. In the subject areas of Math, Social Studies, and Sciences, all subgroups are afforded one-on-one tutoring during school and after school, peer tutoring during school, and differentiated instruction within the content areas. Students who are not performing at an acceptable level in a particular class are targeted and recommended for additional instruction and after-school tutoring by a licensed teacher in that subject area. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Our students continue to struggle with both the ELA Regents exam and the social studies state exams. We are therefore programming our Integrated courses with ELA, thus supporting the subject area with language acquisition philosophies. We are also offering extra support through our after-school/Saturday program, which will include literacy support and both Global History and U.S. History content support. This program is especially targeted to our freshmen and sophomores as a means of early intervention to ensure that students are meeting the annual threshhold of 10 credits per year. In addition, we will expand our after-school tutoring program to include ELA Regents and Algebra support from October through June. 5  10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? None of our current programs will be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. As per Midwood High School policy, all students regardless of academic program, are invited to join all extracurricular activities. These include athletics, academic clubs, social clubs, arts clubs, ARCHON (community service honor society), art programs, and performing arts programs. Announcements are made twice weekly to inform the entire school community about both extracurricular and curricular activities. Our ENL students are highly esteemed because in the past few years our students were present in the soccer team, swim team, and school bands. Several of our ENL students were the driving force in the formation of our school’s cricket team, which is now highly competitive within the high school leagues in New York City. All of our ELLs are afforded the opportunity to apply and be selected to one of Midwood High School's three academic programs: LASI (Liberal Arts and Sciences Institute), Medical Science Institute (students must have a 90 average in academic subjects), or the Humanities Institute (students must have an average of 85 and take 2 years of Latin). ELLs are recommended by teachers and guidance counselors to join one of the above mentioned programs. Our ELLs must complete a program of study in one of our three institutes in order to graduate. As a graduation requirement, Midwood High School requires that every student get service credit, which our ELLs get by serving as Peer Tutoring monitors, office monitors, athletic team members, teacher assistants, and performers in school plays and musicals. Hoever, we also have afterschool and supplemental programs that are exclusively for ELLs. We have after school tutoring in math, science, and ELA weekly beginning in October and runs from 3:30 - 4:30. We also run a series of college workshops 3 Saturdays, during which parents and students learn about the college application process/ financial aid/ SAT/ college selection. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials for newcomers, SIFE, and Special Education students include grammar textbooks, reading anthologies, a differentiated independent reading library, and beginner level language software (Tell Me More), visual aids, picture dictionaries and word games. The students receiving services for 4 to 6 years, SIFE, and Special Education students are provided with social studies texts designed for ELLs with content in both Global and United States History, adaptations of classic works of literature, fiction and non-fiction reading material, and grammar textbooks and workbooks. Long Term ELLs, SIFE, and Special Education students are also provided with grammar textbooks and authentic reading materials, including full length plays and novels. Students at all levels and subgroups are given the opportunity to practice all four skills of listening, speaking, reading and writing through the use of these materials. General supplies such as paper and writing implements are available to all ELL students in our ENL Resource Center. English, Global Studies, and Living Environment tutoring is available using web-based DBQ and Biology learning sites. All subject areas have access to technology, such as ipads and computers- so that our students can search/ translate/ and produce material in a professional manner. Students may access these sites in the ENL Resource Center which is equipped with multiple computers. A lending library of fiction and non-fiction books in all levels in English and the students’ native languages is also available in our ENL Resource Center. In addition, bilingual dictionaries, bilingual subject glossaries, and content area textbooks are on hand for tutoring and homework help. We further support our students by also having on hand access to literature, history and language arts books in the ELLs' native languages. Most notably, we ensure our ELL students equitable access to much needed computers and printing services. We have installed computer software designed to enhance our ELL students’ speaking, listening, reading and writing skills (Tell Me More), as well as Rosetta Stone English levels 1-3. ELL teachers, along with many content area teachers, utilize Smart Board technology in its multimedia capacity to enrich curriculum by activating prior knowledge and making real world curriculum connections. Teachers use PowerPoint regularly to present material to students, as well as assigning projects to students which may utilize PowerPoint presentations. Students are thereby gaining useful practice in the real world use of technology in the furtherance of content and language acquisition. Our students have access to Achieve 3000, Newsela, and various apps for pronunciation thorugh the use of our student computers in the ENL Resource Center and the ipads available to them. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 6  Students in the ENL Program are encouraged to use glossaries and bilingual dictionaries in all classes so that they may continue to acquire vocabulary in the native language while learning new words in English. We provide all students with dictionaries. We encourage students to process new information in their native language through small group discussion or journal writing in order to facilitate the acquisition of content. At the entering level, our students are provided with native language works of fiction and non-fiction at different levels, where available, to encourage literacy development in the native language. Where possible, instructions and background information are provided to students by peers and teachers. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The school ensures all required services/ resources support and correspond to ELL's ages and grade levels by following curricula aligned to the CCLS in all subject areas. Students are being supported and prepared to meet the requirements for high school graduation through appropriate programming, coursework, and materials used in all classes. Students are provided with tutoring appropriate to meeting the goal of completing course requirements and successfully passing all required state examinations. ENL teachers incorporate content material and support academic vocabulary building in their integrated classes so that students are prepared for content area coursework and Regents examinations. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Instructional materials for newcomers, SIFE, and Special Education students include grammar textbooks, reading anthologies, a differentiated independent reading library, and beginner level language software (Tell Me More), visual aids, picture dictionaries and word games. The students receiving services for 4 to 6 years, SIFE, and Special Education students are provided with social studies texts designed for ELLs with content in both Global and United States History, adaptations of classic works of literature, fiction and non-fiction reading material, and grammar textbooks and workbooks. Long Term ELLs, SIFE, and Special Education students are also provided with grammar textbooks and authentic reading materials, including full length plays and novels. Students at all levels and subgroups are given the opportunity to practice all four skills of listening, speaking, reading and writing through the use of these materials. General supplies such as paper and writing implements are available to all ELL students in our ENL Resource Center. English, Global Studies, and Living Environment tutoring is available using web-based DBQ and Biology learning sites. All subject areas have access to technology, such as ipads and computers- so that our students can search/ translate/ and produce material in a professional manner. Students may access these sites in the ENL Resource Center which is equipped with multiple computers. A lending library of fiction and non-fiction books in all levels in English and the students’ native languages is also available in our ENL Resource Center. In addition, bilingual dictionaries, bilingual subject glossaries, and content area textbooks are on hand for tutoring and homework help. We further support our students by also having on hand access to literature, history and language arts books in the ELLs' native languages. Most notably, we ensure our ELL students equitable access to much needed computers and printing services. We have installed computer software designed to enhance our ELL students’ speaking, listening, reading and writing skills (Tell Me More), as well as Rosetta Stone English levels 1-3. ELL teachers, along with many content area teachers, utilize Smart Board technology in its multimedia capacity to enrich curriculum by activating prior knowledge and making real world curriculum connections. Teachers use PowerPoint regularly to present material to students, as well as assigning projects to students which may utilize PowerPoint presentations. Students are thereby gaining useful practice in the real world use of technology in the furtherance of content and language acquisition. Our students have access to Achieve 3000, Newsela, and various apps for pronunciation thorugh the use of our student computers in the ENL Resource Center and the ipads available to them. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). When newly enrolled ELLs have been identified prior to the start of the school year, parents and students are invited to visit the school to meet with a member of the Admissions Intake Team, parent coordinator, and ELL guidance counselor, if possible. Students and parents are invited to participate in a tour of the school facilities, with a translator where possible. We also have a summer school bridge program to which we invite all our newly enrolled students the summer before their attendance to our school. This affords them the opportunity to meet the ENL teachers, ENL Assistant Principal and become familiar with the school building. Orientation for parents or guardians of newly enrolled ELLs, including distribution of materials and forms 7  apprising them of ELL services, is held in the early fall. In addition, an individual meeting with parents/guardians and student takes place whenever a newly identified ELL student enters school. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? The language elecctives available inour school are the following: French, Spanish, and Latin. All ELL students are offered the languages open to the rest of the students in the building. However, ELL students who speak a lower incidence language are also encouraged to take the LOTE exam in that language, if possible, thus providing the student with the opportunity to graduate with an advanced Regents diploma. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional development for all staff members is designed to bring their level of expertise with ELLs to an instructional peak. Teachers of ENL and all teachers of ELL's in general, as well as guidance counselors, paraprofessionals, assistant principals, Special Education teachers, psychologists, and speech therapists, will attend staff development workshops and conferences which focus on development and implementation of instructional strategies designed to facilitate ELL/LEP students’ acquisition of English language proficiency. During these workshops, teachers develop and revise existing curricula, and align them to New York State ENL and Common Core ELA performance standards. During monthly common planning sessions led by ENL pedagogues, teachers work to develop instructional strategies designed to facilitate implementation of the curricula in both standalone ENL classes and content area classes. Teachers also receive professional development to assist pupils in preparation for the NYSESLAT. ENL teachers, content area teachers, bilingual content area teachers, and the Native Language Arts teacher attend professional development workshops and conferences provided by district 22 and joint department conferences (i.e. Foreign Languages, English, Social Studies, Science, etc.). All teachers, paraprofessionals, guidance counselors, secretaries and the Parent Coordinator will receive the training for personnel of ELLs mandated by the New York State Education Department. Teachers attend professional development workshops for teachers of ELLs sponsored by both the district or DELLs Office, and local colleges and universities. We conduct bi-annual professional development for all previously mentioned staff on Election Day and Chancellor’s Conference Day. All ELL teachers continue to focus on aligning instruction to the Common Core Learning Standards for all ELL's. To that end, teachers attend workshops designed to adapt teaching to the instructional literacy shift across content areas and thorugh the Integrated model. Math teachers of ELLs will receive training in the Common Core through participation in the Common Core Fellows program and the Math for America program, which provides ongoing PD specific to the teaching of Common Core aligned mathematics to ELLs. ELA teachers and Science teachers will also receive subject specific workshops and the integrated model of instruction. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 8  Teachers are provided with ongoing professional development to assist ELLs as they transition from middle school to high school via turnkey training, training provided by the DELLs and content area assistant principals. We also run an ELL summer program with a focus on social studies and the arts, granting our ENL and content area teachers the opportunity to interact with incoming 9th graders in a positive environment. During the school year, we hold bi-monthly faculty meetings. These are alternating departmental and plenary meetings. Our ENL teachers and AP will provide PD for all departments throughtout the course of the year. For the 17.5 hours of required PD for ENL and bilingual education teachers, these teachers and the ENL AP will attend workshops given by DELLs or other professional organizations to support the needs of ELLs. The professional knowledge gained at these PDs will then be turnkeyed to content area teachers throughout the building. For the specific 5.25 hours of ELL professional development for all staff, the following topics will be addressed: • The use of linguistic goals in subject areas to support ELLs. • Differentiation for ELLs and in subject areas. • The workshop model and ELLs • Classroom technology to support ELLs. The school secretary will maintain records of the number of hours teachers have completed of mandated professional development. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In addition to the mandated parent orientation meetings and scheduled parent-teacher conferences, individual meetings will be held with every parent/ guardian in the ENL program. Appointments will be made by a secretary via telephone, in the parent's preferred language using the Translation and Interpretation Unit as needed. These meetings will be conducted by the assistant principal of ENL. Additional stakeholders may be present, such as ENL / bilingual teachers, the ELL guidance counselor, and subject area teachers. During meetings, all aspects of student academic and language proficiency growth will be discussed. ATS records will be use to follow student growth on the NYSESLAT. Records of all phone calls and in-person individual meetings will be kept in a file in the ENL office. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Teachers, school leaders, and parents work to create an open door policy whereby parents become true members of our school community. Parents, family members, and community members are welcome and encouraged to volunteer in school activities and to participate in the education of all of our students. In order to increase parental involvement, we encourage all parents, including parents of ELLs, to take part in PTA meetings, parent-teacher conferences, and students’ extracurricular and curricular activities. We encourage them to visit classrooms and to use the educational software in our ENL Resource Center with their children. Parents are allowed to sit in their child’s classroom at the invitation of the teacher. Family members are invited to participate in classes as guest speakers to share life experiences and other relevant expertise with the students. Parents are also invited to participate in our multicultural day event. Parents are encouraged to assist in coordinating special events in the school. In addition to the initial orientation for parents of newly enrolled ELL / LEP students, in September we provide a back-to-school orientation for the parents of all ELLs. Teachers of ELLs reach out to parents by mail and telephone, in the parents' preferred language as needed, to maximize attendance at this orientation. During this meeting, parents are provided with an overview of Midwood’s ENL and bilingual programs, school expectations, school calendar, student and parent handbooks, Getting to Know High School: Helpful Hints for Parents pamphlet, the Guide for Parents of English Language Learners, schedule of Parent Association meetings, report card distribution dates, graduation requirements card, and information on tutoring and support services. Parents are also introduced to the AP of Foreign Languages and ENL, ENL teachers, ENL guidance counselor, Parent Coordinator, and other pertinent personnel who present our ENL and transitional bilingual programs, discuss graduation requirements, remind parents about testing modifications and NYSESLAT testing, and meet one-on-one with parents as needed. 9  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: N/A 0 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Michael McDonnell, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 1  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Midwood High School School DBN: 22k405 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Michael McDonnell Title Principal M. Teresa Fernandez Assistant Principal Carol Ardito Max Pinsky Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Skhy LoBianco-Boasi Parent Marie Volcy Joey Pavone Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Kendra Lane School Counselor Micahel Prayor Christine Etienne Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Maria Micillo-Rizzi Other A.P. Special Ed Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 10/30/15 1/1/01 10/30/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 2  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 22K405 School Name: Midwood HighSchool Superintendent: Michael Prayor The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Carol Ardito Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Parents are given home language surveys when they enroll in our school. Additionally, we have an aggressive phone outreach practice from our school secretary and parent coordinator who, using bilingual staff bilingual staff or the over the phone service of the Translation and Interpretation unit, ensure that we are aware of the home language for all of our students and any resulting translation/interpretation needs. We also identify languages needed by comparing the Emergency contact cards to our ATS records. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 3  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Our parents' preferred language of communication are varied and reflect the make up of our large school. English is the preferred language of communication for a large majority of our parents, over 1700. The breakdown of the rest of the languages are as follows in order of preferred language: Chinese/Mandarin/Cantonese 654, Urdu 344, Russian 332, Spanish 327, Haitian Creole 217, Bengali/ Bangla 148, Arabic 70, Albanian 29, Uzbek 24, Ukrainian 22, Turkish 15, Serbo-Croatian 13, Polish 12, Vietnamese10, and several languages in the single digits including the following: Armenian, Burmese, Bulgarian, Hebrew, Bahasa, Korean, Macedonian , Tagalog, Portuguese, Punjabi, Slovanian, Tajik, Shluh, Telugu, Thai, Tibetan, Malayalam, Twi, Yoruba. NA NA NA see left see left see left see left NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. NONE Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 4  Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. In the both, Fall and Spring semesters, the school distributes the following: academic calendar, parent-teacher conference announcements, after school tutoring program announcements and NYState testing dates, general school assembly announcements, college night announcements. All documents are placed in our website which has the capability of having parents select their desired language online. NA NA NA See left See left NA NA NA NA NA NA 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? In both, Fall and Spring semesters, the school will have parent-teacher conferences. Individual parent meetings with all ENL parents and the ENL coordinator. Individual meetings with guidance counselors and college advisors, as needed. Individual meetings with Deans, attendance teacher and other administrators, as needed. Monthly Parent Association meetings. NA NA NA SEE LEFT SEE LEFT NA NA NA NA NA NA 5  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We use a cell phone application as well as Skedula which will translate message into home language Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Training at the first faculty meeting as well as continuing dates Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Large posters announcing translation services are available in six languages are posted in our front lobby. Language ID Guide is at security desk, main office, Parent Coordinator's office and AP ENL office. All security personnel have been instructed to ask all visitors if they need translation services. Students are provided with non-English language announcement to take home whenever appropriate. The availability of non-English announcements, teacher meetings, and guidance meetings is posted on our website. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will develop a parent survey to be administered to all parents in the school. The parent coordinator, as the LAC, will spearhead the survey and its findings. Once findings are analyzed, changes to further support our parent population will be implemented. 6 
