2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP-CS) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 13K419 School Name: SCIENCE SKILLS CENTER HIGH SCHOOL FOR SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND THE CREATIVE ARTS Principal: DAHLIA MCGREGOR 2018-19 CEP-CS 1    Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Science Skills Center High School 331300011419 9-12 School Number (DBN): 13K419 49 Flatbush Avenue Extension, Brooklyn, NY 11201 718-243-9413 Phone Number: 718-243-1016 Fax: Dahlia McGregor dmcgreg@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Email Address: Dahlia McGregor Clifton Floyd CharmineCalendar & Marie Pierre Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Michelle Jasmin Deborah Charles Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Victoria Ringston Joel Gooden Shelly Horn, Center for Supportive Schools CBO Representative: Geographical District: 13 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Janice Ross Superintendent: 1396 Broadway Brooklyn, NY 11221 jross11@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718- 455- 4635 Phone Number: 718-455-4684 Fax:   Field Support Center (FSC) Brooklyn North Bernadette Fitzgerald FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn NY 11201 Bfitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-3954 Phone Number: 718-935-2382 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Dahlia McGregor Clifton Floyd CharmaineCalendar Marie Pierre Corey Darrell Victoria Ringston Joel Gooden Shelly Horn Christa Benfield Deslyn Dover *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable/ Member/Teacher Member/Teacher   Name Delia Joseph Michelle Yarde-Jasmin Dawn Campbell Junette Bagot Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/CSA Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Through our Core Values, the Science Skills Center High School community motivates, inspires, and generates hope for students who have been historically underserved and underrepresented. We provide an accelerated learning, instruction and post-secondary education to prepare our scholars to pursue STEAM careers (Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts and Mathematics). 0  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Belief System: (1.2) At Science Skills we share the belief that students learn best in a structured learning environment, when their needs are identified and lessons are designed to address their learning needs in a systematic way, when each teacher develops lessons with clear learning goals focused on student needs, cultural responsiveness, and structured support for each student to achieve the established high expectations and feel successful. The fundamental principles guiding Science Skills Center High School are that: 1. Motivated student, having had the benefit of a rigorous course of study with dedicated teachers, are fully capable of succeeding academically in college, and in the various skilled occupations in which students choose to get further training. 2. Meeting the needs of such students demands the skills of a faculty that is committed to fostering the development of adolescents while teaching to motivate students to succeed in academic areas. 3. The curriculum encompasses both academic learning and discipline, thus laying the foundation for students’ success. Application of these principles will increase the educational standards of students, providing them with the knowledge and skills necessary to compete globally. The principal and administrative team use the Danielson Framework for Teaching (a research-based framework) to: 1. Observe all teachers and provide them with timely and actionable feedback 2. Engage in cycles of inquiry using teacher and student performance data 3. Plan differentiated/individualized professional learning and school wide professional development 4. Use data from students learning and evidence of teacher practice to inform feedback to teachers and systems for improvement Our unique approach to programming allows our students to earn sixteen (16) credits in their 9th and 10th grades, provide them with multiple opportunities to take ELA Regents as early as the 9th grade, and take College Now classes, dual credit courses and at least one AP course in their 10th grade. In addition, our school's Early College offerings mandate our students to take two college course or dual credit course and two AP courses in their 11th and 12th grades. Our core consists of all students taking 4 years of Math & Science, 3 years of a Foreign Language, taking at least 2 to three AP courses by the end of 12 th grade, Advancement Via Individual Determination (AVID) used a program with strategies to support students performing in the middle to rise to high performers, AVID instructional Strategies (WICOR) are used school wide for instructional consistence, one year of a Technology Course, summer internship and Service Learning credits. We offer six Career Tracks: Science Skills Math and Science, Gateway Pre-College Education Honors Program, Project Lead The Way: Pre-Engineering Program, Humanities & The Arts Program Early College Pharmacology, and Computer Technology. The Peer enabled Reconstructed Classroom (PERC) instructional program was implemented in all Chemistry classes where students are selected as Teachers Assistant Scholars (TAS). This has provided an opportunity for students to become trained Teachers Assistant Scholars in the classroom while instruction is in progress to be better prepared to pass the Chemistry Regents exams. 1  Our shared vision of effective teaching and learning nurtures a culture of continuous improvement through (a) monitoring, tracking, evaluating, and developing teacher practice and performance to improve instruction; (b) creating and maintaining a result-focused learning environment that is responsive to the individual student needs and the diversity among students; (c) analyzing teacher and student performance using multiple data points for evidence and further inquiry to assess progress in student learning and improvement in teacher and leadership practices. Collaborations/Partnerships We are engaged in strategic collaborations and partnerships with: Long Island University, New York City College of Technology, Medgar Evers College, New York University, SUNY, University at Albany, The Rochester Institute of Technology, Columbia University Peer Group Connection (PGC) through the Center for Supportive schools to provide socio-emotional support), Morningside Center (for Restorative Circles), Brooklyn Community Foundations for Restorative Justice Practice, Peer Opening Act, FIRST Robotics Competition, AVID, ScriptEd, PERC,, Microsoft and the National Association of Secondary School Principals Honor Society and National Association Student Counsel. Special Initiatives: Our school will be implementing Mastery Grading as a school wide initiative and a tired intervention approach to support behaviors in a restorative fashion. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. About 40% of incoming 9th grade students scored level 1 in either ELA or math or both. This means that these students are lacking the basic skills in ELA and math to be successful in high school. Our school offers a Free Standing ENL program to our students who are transitioning to learning English. The language proficiency for these students varies from the beginning level to the advanced level. The ENL instruction is geared towards their various language levels to support them to develop proficiency in English. Over 15% of our students have an IEP and receive special services to foster their academic development. Our SWD students receive counseling services, integrated co-teaching and student support services. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which our school made the most progress over the past year are: Rigorous instructions – Our school defines effective instruction as rigorous instruction that is aligned to the Next Generation Learning Standards. We believe rigorous instruction includes: students engaging in productive struggle, student-to-student discussion, and higher order thinking questions. This year our scholarship reports show a significant increase in student performance across all grades and Regents passing rates; increase student-to-student discussion in classes as indicated from classroom observations and assessments both formative and summative. The data from Common Assessments are used to design units and lessons, to revise curriculum maps, and/or re-teaching skills and content as needed; providing more targeted and actionable teacher feedback to students, provide students with next steps for achieving mastery; demonstrate higher level of student accountability and ownership of their learning through the PERC program and peer support in the classrooms. In addition, there is evidence of improved teacher practice, and an increased alignment of curriculum and unit plans to CCLS and NYS Content Standards and Next Generation Instructional Shifts. Supportive Environments – Our staff place the highest value on our students. We have established a classroom and school culture where students feel supported through check points, plan for success, case conferencing and monitoring of student progress, and opportunities for students to complete missing work, get additional instructional time in after our school program and Saturday Academy. Independent and personalized learning is also embedded in our learning environment since our students are also given the opportunity to take courses online. We do consistent and regular parent outreach to support our students and keep parents informed of their child’s progress through our 2  “Supervising for Academic Success” parent-student-principal conference. As a result, our attendance has significantly improved. Our school's average attendance for the 2018-2019 school year is 93%. Collaborative Teachers : Two of our core values are teamwork and collaboration and shared leadership. We have structures to support teacher collaboration; teachers meet once per week for mandated professional learning opportunities, and twice per week teachers meet in teacher teams for more targeted collaboration, such as: inquiry work reviewing and analyzing student data and curriculum planning and assessment design. In addition, our school has five instructional leads who are members of the Instructional Cabinet which collectively design and facilitate professional development sessions for teachers, develop a cycle of inter-visitations for teachers to observe each other and share best practices, and give each other feedback for improvement. All professional development sessions are teacher led and specifically designed to address particular area of practice or professional growth. This distributive approach to leadership has helped us develop teacher leaders in their content areas. Our school's continuous key areas of focus for the school year (2018-2019) are in the elements of Rigorous Instruction and Strong Family-Community Ties. Rigorous Instruction  To continue improving teacher practice and incorporating the Next Generation Learning Standards Instructional Shifts  To continue to ensure that all lessons are student centered and students are leading their own learning  To increase consistency in instructional practices across grade levels and content areas through teacher collaboration  To increase student performance in the Global Regents exam  To increase the practice of monitoring and tracking the progress of all students Collaborative Teachers:  To continue to shift mindsets around teacher collaboration and commitment to student success  To identify clear focus for collaboration and evidence of success around teacher collaboration for example the work done by teachers in the Science and Global Studies departments and their increase student performance  To develop engaging and motivating lessons that allow students to think, engage in interactive discussion, formulate their own questions, ask their peers questions and self and or peer assess assigned work  To increase opportunities for staff members to work in teams or triads towards similar goals  To develop strong partnership among teachers within a culture of respect and continuous improvement Strong Community Ties:  To develop stronger partnership with parents  To increase parental participation and presence/engagement in our school.  To provide parents with parent skills development workshops based on identified needs form parent survey  To develop a strong Alumni Association school partnership  To use community partnership organizations to offer mentoring to students. 3  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 13K419 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 562 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 15 14 5 10 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 28 22 5 4 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 81.0% % Attendance Rate 76.9% % Reduced Lunch 3.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.7% 17.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.42 0% 25% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 87% 82% 74.1% 6.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YES No N/A 91 91 7 94.1% 5.0% 14.4% 69.2% 7.1% 2.8% 6 19% 5 N/A N/A 81% 77% 79.5% 24% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Advance teacher observations data showed teachers instructional practices in the following areas need improvement: student-to-student discussion in classroom, use of assessment in instruction, (this includes students using rubrics as a guide to improve their work products) checking for understanding and evidence of incorporating the Next Generation instructional shifts in teachers units and lessons. The June 2018 Regents data showed only 61% of students who took the Math Regents that year scored at 65 or better. The quality of our students scores have improved. Over 72% of the students who passed the June 2018 Algebra 1 Regents are college ready.Regardless of the 10% increase in scores there is still room for improvement as indicated from the item analysis in students did not complete all questions in Part C of the Regents exam, demonstrating a need for increased opportunities for students to complete constructed response questions. Strengths:  Curriculum aligned to Next Generation Learning Standards, NYS Standards, and Next Generation Instructional Shifts  Weekly instructional calendar to create a window into the classroom and inform students of the expected learning outcomes  Agenda driven lessons with “I can statement” as the aim to inspire and motivate students to learn  Students are provided with the "I can statement" that they must master for each marking period to be successful in their classes. Integration of literacy skills in lessons across the curriculum   Application of school-wide instructional focus in lesson planning and delivery  Monthly common assessments with time for data review and analysis and redesigning and teaching of lessons based on student performance outcomes data Integration of literacy across all grades and content areas.   AVID strategies used across classrooms to engage students in reading discussion and writing activities.  New York Teaching Academy- four teachers classrooms are being used a lab for best practice for pre-service schools. Priority Needs:  Consistency in instructional practices around student-to-student discussion,(all teachers make sure that all students voices are heard during group or class discussions) opportunities for productive struggle, incorporation of Next Generation instructional shifts and literacy strategies in units and lesson planning and 5  delivery, check for understanding in the classroom, and a mindset shift to commitment to student learning and the belief that all of our students can be successful. Intentional planning of differentiated instruction to ensure that students needs are identified and strategies are selected to address learning needs to allow all students to experience success each day.   To increase student performance in the Math and ELA course scholarship ( from over 80% to over 95%) and Regents exams. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of our teachers will demonstrate consistency in school-wide instructional practices (student-to-student discussion, incorporation of the CCLS Instructional Shifts and in their lessons, planning and delivering differentiated instruction, check for understanding and infusion of daily literacy tasks-through Cornell Note Taking Strategies & Socratic seminars). This will be evident through classroom observations as indicated in the Advance System, in units and lesson planning review, and in an increase in student performance in the ELA and Math Regent exam. 6 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teachers Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Principal & Assistant Principals All Teachers Oct 2018- June 2019 Assistant Principal & Instructional Leads Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). School Designed Instructional Rubric: This rubric will be used to improve teacher practices and to ensure that the three consistent school wide practices are evident in all classrooms. All teachers will use the instructional rubric as a guide in developing unit and lesson plans and for peer inter-visitations. AVID/ WICOR Strategies will be used across the students to create consistent learning environments within our classrooms, allow students to engage in reading, discussion and writing tasks as they lead their own learning. Strategies to Support School wide Focus: All teachers will be trained to use the Question Formulation Technique that will be used to get students to ask their own questions and building off their own peers’ questions. A school wide discussion rubric will used to assist students in evaluating group discussion. Interim Assessments: Our common assessment that administered each marking period will be used to make curricular changes and adjustments to instruction and design small group instruction within each classroom. Collaborative Learning Through Peer- Inter-visitation: Our teacher teams along, instructional Leads and Assistant Principals of supervision will work to develop cycles of teacher facilitated, non-evaluative classroom visits to focus on the collaborative development of teachers’ instructional knowledge and skills. Each teacher team will select a lens for each cycle of inter-visitation based on the three consistent practices (rigorous instruction, high expectations for learning for every students and engagement for learning) that must be evident in all classrooms. The peer-inter-visitation will help our teachers to learn from the successful practice of their colleagues or supporting one another in reflective teaching practices through peer mentoring. Teachers will utilize the following protocols for inter-visitation: 1. Peer Inter-visitation 7 Teachers Sept -June 2019 Principal & Assistant Principals Parents & Students Sept -June 2018 Principal, Parent Coordinator and Parent Leaders 2. Reciprocal Peer Mentoring Frequent Cycles of Observations: All teachers will be observed at least twice per month by the principal or an assistant. The feedback provided to teachers will be timely and actionable with room for teachers to reflect and make adjustments to their practices by implementing the suggestions or ideas from their supervisors. Strategies to Address High Need Student Sub-groups: Each teacher will be responsible to pay close attention to the students in the lowest third, ENL students and SWD students while designing their lessons so that learning is accessible to all students in their classes. Our school’s checkpoint system will be used to track and monitor these students progress and make parental outreach. The diagnostic test, learning styles and interest survey data will be used to design action plans to ensure successful completion of all courses. All high need students in our school including overage /under-credited, SIFE, STH will be required to complete our school’s plan for success and attend extended day school and Saturday for extra instructional time. Parental Engagement & Support: All parents will receive will participate in a school designed survey to gather data on their knowledge of Common Core Learning Standards, Pupil Path (school’s online grade book), other online content review and assessment tools such as Castle Learning & Test Wizard and strategies they use at home to support their child to be successful in school. The data will be used to identify focus areas to engage our parents during the 2017-2018 school year, monthly teams for parent engagement and to develop our annual parent engagement and support professional development plan for 2017-2018 school year. Our work with parents will focus on making sure that they are engaged in school activities, increased their presence in our school and development a key group of parent leaders. Science Skills administrator and teachers will also assist our parents to develop required skills to support students for academic success by offering activities through a book club, technology and GED classes in our school. Workshops will be planned and executed to help parents develop question formulation skills and learn three specific roles they can play to participate effectively in their children’s education. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will continue to support parents in the development of their understanding in the Common Core Learning standards expectations and effective strategies to use at home to engage their children in a continuous cycle of learning by providing parents with a menu of learning opportunities based on their learning needs as identified through the parent involvement and engagement survey. Each parent will be provided with a calendar of learning 8  opportunities that will be hosted by the Parent Coordinator, Principal, Assistant Principal, teachers and school partners. Activities will start in September 2018 and end in June 2019. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Our school’s instructional cabinet and support based staff will utilize online resources and tools, community based partners and our teachers’ schedule will allow for three common meeting times per week and an extended school day schedule will be used to increase the instructional time including 6 Saturday school in the fall and 8 Saturday school in the spring, Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E X 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 90% of our teachers will show the use of consistent school wide practices as observed in all classrooms across our school and 85% of the teachers will be effective in the instructional domain of the Danielson Framework for Learning. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Advance System Report - Measure of Teacher Practice (MOTP) and low inference notes from classroom observations Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Needs Assessment : An analysis of teacher scholarship reports form STARS shows a pattern of inconsistent use of progress monitoring tools to assess student performance and provide them with timely and targeted support to ensure their successful completion of course requirements. School wide focus will be on the following sub groups, ENL, SWD and students in the bottom quartile. Strengths: We have developed tools and processes for teachers to monitor progress such as: check points that allow students time to make up missing or incomplete work; the plan for success to allow students to reflect on their performance and develop action plans with time line to get back on track; extended instructional time for students after school and Saturdays; case conferencing with teachers and students for teachers to re-examine the effectiveness of strategies used and identify, mastery grading policy along with students aware of what they need to master in each course to be successful.y and utilize new strategies to change conditions of learning. Priority Needs : Teachers regular and consistent review of student performance data to identify areas of needs and target ongoing support to improve our student outcomes. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will utilize the support tools such as the Student Plan for Success to increase student commitment and accountability of their own learning, and consistently monitoring student performance data. This will be evidenced by an increase in scholarship reports, teacher frequent communication with students and parents about student progress, areas of growth and level of support needed. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Students Support Tools: All teachers will utilize our school wide systems to support our students learning. The plan for success with assist with increasing our students’ level of accountability and displaying responsible behaviors to achieve desired learning goals. Through weekly data teams our teachers will look at samples of students work with the CAC protocol. Academic Conference: Guidance Counselor will schedule and conduct academic conference for students who have failed or in danger of failing. During this process each student’s transcript is evaluated through the use of our school’s graduation worksheet to assist students in tracking progress towards graduation and to refocus students. Parents are required to review conference notes and action plan with students and sign the form and return it to the guidance counselor Supportive Culture: All 9 th grade students will have a peer leader from the 12 th or 11 th grade class. 50 students in the 11 th and 12 th grade will take a yearlong leadership class through the Peer Group Connection (PCG) curriculum to develop their leadership skills and to mentor 9 th grade students. Mentors will meet with their mentees at least twice per week to employ the leadership skills. The PGC program will help our school to Social, emotional and personal behaviors will Tired Interventions & Restorative Circles : will be used in the classrooms and advisory sessions to help our students to develop resilience Data Review & Analysis Conference: This will be held once each marking period to help our teachers to reflect on their practices and research new strategies to help change the conditions of learning Parental Use of School’s Online Grade Book: Datacation and the parent coordinator will provide parents with training to use our schools online grade book to track and monitor students progress Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers and students Sept 2018 Students and Parents to June 2019 Sept, 2018 to June 2019 Students Sept 2018 to June 2019 All teachers are responsible for implementing the strategies. Principal and Assistant Principals will oversee these activities. Guidance Counselors Faculty Advisors teaching the PGC classes will implement the curriculum Site Team Coordinator, Assistant Principal Teachers Sept to June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principals Parents Sept 2018 - June 2019 Parent Coordinator is responsible to make sure that all parents have a pupil path account and know how to use it 1  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be engaged in a two part series of workshop that provides hands-on experience of things that they can do at home and lines of communication that they need to open with various stakeholders in our school, tools that they can utilize on an ongoing basis to monitor their child's progress and strategies to support academic success at home. The work with our parents will begin in September 2017 and ends in June 2018. The personnel responsible for this work will be, the principal, Parent Coordinators and the school's Parent Engagement Committee members including parents, students and teachers Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. All 9th grade students will be scheduled during the same period as the leadership classes with 11 and 12 grade peer leaders to accommodate weekly activity day out reach days . Peer leaders will attend fall retreat and spring retreat . Two teachers will carry a split program in order to teach a section of leadership class. Two guidance counselors will be assigned to the leadership class as supporting advisors for the class. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, STARS report will show 92% of our students passing their core classes and students earning a total of 6 credits. on the report card. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Formative and summative assessments, New York State Regents exams Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our instructional focus has been increasing the quality of questioning techniques and strategies as shown by the Advance Teacher evaluation system, with emphasis on student-to-student discussion and productive struggle. Strengths : Our school community has developed a shared understanding of effective instruction through professional development sessions, student quantitative and qualitative data review to assess what works and what needs to be improved in the classroom as well as the discussion, review, and sharing of best practices and evidence of effective instruction in their teacher development teams. Priority Needs : To have teachers consistently develop engaging lessons with multiple opportunities for students to think critically and engage in meaningful discourse, do the heavy intellectual lifting, question each other thinking, make comments to their peer’s responses and lead their own learning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 95% of teachers will collaborate in designing and facilitating professional development opportunities for all teachers to improve their practice in increasing student engagement in their classrooms as evidenced by increased student discussion, teacher peer inter-visitations and shared strategies as well as by Advance teacher tracker and learning walks. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Planning Units of Study: All teachers engaged in planning units of study based on Content area and Common Core Learning Standards. Teachers along with Assistant Principal will identify learning standards with instructional outcomes to assist teachers in designing coherent instruction with expected student outcomes. Teachers meet weekly to make revision to units of student based on data gathered from students performance. Strategies to Engage all Students: During Teacher team meetings all teachers will focus on designing lessons that are accessible to all students. Teams will explore and model various strategies to engage students such as creating an intellectually and emotionally safe classroom. For example try to begin each lesson with a warm up activity that can be done by ninety five percent of the students without your help and try to have rules like “We do not let others down”, “We tell others to stop laughing at people.” All teachers allow students time to think and answer questions. All teachers will plan differentiated instruction based on the learning needs of our students with selected strategies to intentionally target our students learning needs to ensure success. Integrated Co-teaching (ICT): ICT teachers meet weekly to plan lessons and co-teach classes seamlessly while focusing on students progress and identifying areas of needs. Reconvene through meeting time to revise lesson and re-teach using different strategies. Teacher designed professional development will be used with best practices for ICT classes modeling the effective ways of collaboration in an ICT class. Google Apps: All teacher will use Google classroom and school created space on Google to share useful resources. Through this progress all teachers will read a select of professional articles that are related to their work as teachers and design to spark their interest and encourage change in practice. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Sept 2018 -June 2019 Assistant principals. Instructional Leads & Principal Teachers Sept 2018 -June 2019 Assistant Principal & Instructional Leads ICT Teachers Sept 2018 -June 2019 Assistant Principal and principal Teachers November 2018 Assistant Principals to June 2019 4  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will review the roles and responsibilities of parents in a collaborative environment with teachers and effective strategies to use to support their efforts. Our parent coordinator and principal will lead this work. Parents will also be provided with a tool kits of ways to work closely with our teachers to ensure the academic success of their child. The time line for this work will be from September 2017 to June 2018. The School Environment Committee will oversee this work. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. All teachers are scheduled for a specified planning period and teacher team meeting time during the course of each week. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 95 % of the data from Google surveys designed to measure teacher collaboration survey, observation data gathered from teacher team meetings, teacher led professional development and teacher team meeting will show the level of teacher collaboration in our school. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Google Surveys for staff & students Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Science Skills Center High School is committed to creating a reflective equity driven and achievement based culture of learning focused on academic success and college readiness for every student; a school culture of mutual support and accountability, high level of professionalism and communication, CCLS-based instruction, and the use of the Danielson Framework for developing and improving teachers’ instructional practice. Strengths: Our shared vision of effective teaching and learning nurtures a culture of continuous improvement through (a) monitoring, tracking, evaluating, and developing teacher practice and performance to improve instruction; (b) creating and maintaining a result-focused learning environment that is responsive to the individual student needs and the diversity among students; (c) analyzing teacher and student performance using multiple data points for evidence and further inquiry to assess progress in student learning and improvement in teacher and leadership practices. This information is obtained from our School Learning Environment Survey. Priority Needs: To ensure that the school’s theory of action, instructional vision lives in every classroom and interaction between administration-teachers-staff-students-parents, teachers-teachers, teachers-students-parents, students-students. All teachers are utilizing the instructional Non-negotiable that are based on instruction, practice and assessment to achieve instructional consistency across classrooms as indicated from classroom observation data. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of all students who are behind in credits and Regents will be on track through the used of pairing students with faculty members and senior students who will act as mentors to provide support and guidance. All Advance Evaluators will continue to utilize the key elements of the instructional vision and the Elements of Successful Teaching to guide their work with teachers and increase their capacity to provide teachers with targeted and timely feedback to improve their instructional practice. This will be evidenced by improved teachers’ performance as measured by the Danielson Framework for Teaching, by the evaluators' capacity to provide differentiated/individualized 6  professional learning opportunities to teachers their use of student performance data to inform their feedback to teachers and increased student outcomes. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Monthly Review of Instructional Vision: Assistant Principal and teachers review the school’s Instructional Vision, identify accomplishments and improvement based on the work completed each month and next steps for growth and improvement. Teachers review their professional goals and its alignment with the work that they have been doing and where they need to focus to accomplish their goals. Instructional Consistency Focus: Principal and Assistant Principal meet with teachers on a one-on-one basis to have them use the Instructional Non- negotiable to assess their practice in the classroom and how they plan, design and delivery their lessons. Light Sail will be used to track our ENL reading levels and provide leveled text for them to read. ENL learning time will be provide for our SWD students before and after school. Students who scored level 1 in ELA and Math will receive double period class in Math and a creative writing class to support the development of their writing stamina. Use of Classroom Walk Through with Evidence Chart: To capture the evidence of the Instructional Vision in action in all classrooms. Instructional Cabinet use data from evidence gathered to design improvement plan and assistant principal work one-on-one with teachers to improve practice along with instructional leads selecting a colleague to work with as a partner. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Sept 2018 to June 2019 Assistant Principals and Instructional Leads Teachers Sept 2018 to June 2019 Principal and assistant Principals Teachers November 2018 to June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principals Instructional Leads Utilize Professional Period: To identify evidence of exceptional practices from peer observation cycles. Teachers Instructional Leads November 2018 to June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school with have patent learning sessions where they will be given a copy of the Framework for Great Schools and each month we will focus on a different element of the Framework to deepen on parents understand of effective 8  school leadership and the results that will exemplify effective school leadership. Our parent leaders will also be exposed to a session through the PTA executive board around key examples of effective school leadership and an opportunity for them to identify examples from the work that is being done in our school. Specific examples of how parents can support their children at home will be generated from parents and our school will provide them with a tool kit to assist in improving the work that they do at home with our students to support academic success. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Student Peer leaders and tutors will be utilized to assist students in the bottom quartile and the instructional leads will meet with the instructional cabinet after school to assess identify evidence, create improvement plan and design cycles of peer inter-visitation and peer modeling sessions during the school day. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Weekly monitoring of instructional consistency will be measure by data gathered from weekly observation data and classroom walk throughs. The Instructional cabinet will discuss data gathered and compare current data with previous data to determine progress and next steps. It is expected that by January 2017 we must have at least 85% instructional consistency across our classrooms. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Classroom observations reports, students monthly common assessment data, marking period grades, final exams ands Regents exams. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A review our our school's data regarding parent interactions with our school shows that parents are very responsive to our school's request for parent meeting, but only about 60 parents attend our Parent Teachers Association meetings on a regular basis Strengths Our parents maintain great relationship with our staff through emails or telephone calls and support teachers' actions to push their children to do better in school and indicated on our School Learning Environment survey. Priority Needs Only two thirds of our parent population has an active account on our school's online grade book/skedula. Our school also need more parents to play an active role as volunteers in our school and participate in our school wide activities and engage in an annual parent project for our school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018 75% of parents will be involved in various activities in our school including attending student -led conference at least twice per year. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parent Coordinator host a Pupil Path drive for parents to assist parents in tracking and monitoring students progress via our school's online grade book. Parents and Guardians Increase the number of parents attending PTA meeting by making sure that parents are involved in the policy making process of the school. School host classroom visits with parents to observe their children in the learning environment Parents Parents October 2018-November 2019 November 2018 and March 2019 Sept 2018 to June 2019 School Team work with Parent Leaders to plan workshops for parents and host at least three workshops that are facilitated by parent leaders through the school year Parents Oct 2018 to June 2019 Parent Coordinator & Principal Parent Teacher Executive board Principal, Assistant Principal, Teacher Leaders and Parent Coordinator Parent leaders, Principal, Parent Coordinator, Assistant Principal and teacher leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Our partnerships with the Center for Supportive School and the Leadership Program will work closely with us top support our work in increasing parent involvement and engagement. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session for guidance counselor to host training sessions for parents and teachers to do parent training sessions throughout the school year. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 1  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. At least 90% of our students will earn 6+ credits by January 31, 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Our Mid-year school wide assessment in the fall and the Mock Regents and AP exams will be used a assessment tools to measure progress Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students who failed ELARegents exam and classes Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Digital Reading Program (ESL- through Light Sail) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small groupsOne-on-oneWhole class During the School DayPM School ESL, SWDand Students in the lowest third Mathematics Students who failed Science Regents and science class Online practice and support Focus reading Group Cornell Note Taking Strategy PM school Regents Prep Tutoring Saturday School Tutoring. Khan Academy, HMH Digital platform Reading Inventory and Reading Count Small groupswhole classOne-on-one During the school dayWeek days ESL&SWDstudents PM school Lowest Third Science Social Studies Students who failed Science regents ESL& SWDstudents Lowest Third Lowest Third Regents prep classesTutoring TutoringOnline learning tools such as Khan Academy, Algebra Nation, Castle learning, Text Wizzard, HMH Small groupWhole class One-on-one and the use of Khan Academy and Test Wizzard Saturdays During the school day During the school dayweek days Saturday Regents prep classes Small group students who failed Global & Us History regents Tutoring Whole group One-on-one 3  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Mandated Counseling by Guidance Counselor, School psychologist and Social Worker Mandated counseling Individual Counseling During the school day Group counseling- Use of Naviance 4  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We currently have 9 Temporary Housing students in our school. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. After school tutoring, mentor support, book club, SAT prep, supplies and school clothing (Uniforms purchased by our school). Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 5  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 6  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Recruitment Strategies To ensure that our teachers are highly qualified we have designed a rigorous recruitment approach that requires 1. teachers to plan and teach a lesson as part of the interviewing process 2. Interviewed by a team from our school community that includes, students, teachers, parents, assistant Principal and principal 3. Present a teaching portfolio during the interview 4. Identify three effective strategies for ESL, SWD and Lowest Third Students that they have used in their practice and discuss the impact on student performance and progress Retention Strategies The school is implementing the following retention strategies to ensure all teachers are highly qualified teachers by the end of fall 2015 1. Professional development needs assessment survey to develop the school’s professional development plan. 2. Department supervisor will use survey data through conferencing with each teacher to develop personalized professional development plan for each teacher. 3. Strategic programming of teachers to make sure that they are teaching in their license areas 4. Use exemplary teachers as mentors and or Instructional Leads for all new teachers and teacher team work 5. Offers after school and during school professional development opportunities for all teachers. 6. Provides resources and support for all teachers to work with different groups of students. 7. Provides opportunities for the creation of a technology driven environment with ongoing professional development activities to attract highly qualified teachers. Assignment & Support All teachers are scheduled to teach within their license area and are provided with targeted support based on areas for improvement noted from classroom observations. 7  2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). 1. Provides PDs on the Common Core Instructional Shifts 2. Provides training in methods to improve student behavior in class and identifying early and appropriate interventions strategies to help students with different learning styles. 3. Actively engages teachers in common planning, weekly teacher team sessions and skill development that are directly linked to improve students’ learning so that all students may meet or exceed New York State Learning standards. 4. Link teacher support to school wide goals, expectations and school improvement plans 5. Provides time and resources for learning, practice, and follow-up. 6. Student support plan- developed with extensive participation from teachers, principal, assistant principal, paraprofessionals and other school personnel (to include parents and other support staff) to ensure that students meet the State’s academic standards. 7 Study groups and peer tutoring 8 Content area team teachers collaboration to create learning communities and support for learning communities and other collaborative learning opportunities for teachers Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 8  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers participate and decide on the questions that they will include in all assessments 1. Teachers decide on the different measure that will be used to assess our students 2. The work in content teams to select and decide on the text that will be used for assessment 3. Teachers also help to identify the focus of the professional development to further enhance their ability to develop test to assess for learning. 4. All marking period research assignments are developed and selected by teachers. 5. Teachers are given an opportunity during group meeting to brainstorm, reflect and identify the support that they need to improve their work of using assessment data to identify strengths and weaknesses. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Federal 377,065.00 0 0 0 x 9 Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Section 4a  Tax Levy (FSF) Local 3,326,612.00 x Section 5a 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. 0  Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 1  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 13K419, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Science Skills Center High School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 3  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) 13K419, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 4  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 5  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy;  advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 6 II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  ● Monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● Ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● Check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● Read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● Set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● Promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● Encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● Volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● Participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● Communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● Respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● Become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● Participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● Take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● Share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 7  ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 8  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes?  Peer Group Connection will continue to support social and emotional learning, school engagement, and, in turn, daily attendance  Advisory will target support for students with disciplinary, academic, and attendance challenges with a targeted focus on 10th grade students who are graduates of the PGC program and may need additional support services  Academic tutoring will provide 1-1 and small group support to provide personalized academic support as well  as PM School offered in all Regents subject areas Success Mentoring (provided by staff, Americorps and TLP staff) will provide individualized support for students to address chronic absenteeism  Arts and youth development programming will engage students, promoting attendance  The STH/Foster Care grant provided by Children’s Village will provide students in temporary housing with additional resources including counseling and mental health services Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound.  School will provide academic intervention supports for at least 30 weeks for at least 3 days per week by June 2018. School will provide enrichment programs for at least 30 weeks for at least 3 days per week by June 2018.   25% of participants will participate in a community service project by June 2018.  Community members will be invited to participate in two events by June 2018.  69 family members will attend one workshop per year and 90% of Building Family workshop attendees will rate it “good” or “excellent” by June 2018.  15 hours per week of expanded learning time will be provided by June 2018.  At least 45% of regular attendees will increase their math, ELA, and science skills through projects based learning in a supportive learning environment.  65% of regular attendees will increase attendance, school engagement and behavior by June 2018. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? By providing wraparound supports for students and families and making the school a place where students are actively engaged and excited to be, students will be encouraged to attend school every day and will be met with the supports they need to be successful. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services 9  provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal CBO Partnership CSS TLP Target Population 9-12 Community School Director 9-12 After School Enrichment and Parent Workshops Supporting advisory, developing relationships, implementing after school enrichment services, managing new grants and partnerships Implement after school enrichment activities, implement parent engagement workshops, align with day school learning Providing services to our STH and foster care students Children's Village STH/Foster Care STH/Foster Care Social Worker Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 65% of regular attendees will increase attendance, school engagement and behavior by June 2018. Attendance Supports All 9th graders, all 10th graders and selected 11th and/or 12th graders CSS Peer Group Connection (PGC) School will provide enrichment programs for at least 30 weeks for at least 3 days per week by June 2018. Community School CBO budget Expanded Learning Time 275 students The Leadership Program Expanded Learning Programs TBD 25% of participants will participate in a community service project by June 2018. School will provide enrichment programs for at least 30 weeks for at least 3 days per week by June 2018. Community School CBO budget for The Leadership Program 0  15 hours per week of expanded learning time will be provided by June 2018. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside X 21st Century SIG Grant School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. 1. 1. The full-time Community School Director (CSD) was hired in partnership with school leadership and the SLT. The CSD is responsible for the day-to-day management of the community school strategy. The CSD is a "community organizer,” facilitating and providing leadership for the collaborative process of developing a continuum of services for children, families, and community members. The CSD drives development of community school action plans and planning for sustainability. The CSD tracks the school’s progress against performance goals, reviews school data, supports program evaluation activities, and manages partnerships. The CSD will ensure that the community school strategy is implemented at exceptional levels of quality with full support, buy-in, and regular communication with stakeholders across the school community. Specific position responsibilities will include: • Build and maintain relationships with administration, faculty, staff, students, parents, and community partners • Organize and expand upon the membership of the Community School Team (CST) to include diverse school community stakeholders and CBOs 1  • Conduct a needs assessment process, including: reviewing school and student-level data; conducting focus groups with parents, students, faculty, staff, administrators, and community partners; and reviewing and/or conducting school climate and culture survey at key times throughout the school year to inform continuous improvement • Conduct a community asset assessment to identify viable partnerships that can meet the needs of students and families of the school community, including ongoing partnership evaluation (including new partnerships with Children’s Village, Americorps, the CATCH program and more) • Recruit and develop partnership agreements with people and community organizations willing to offer programs and services for students and families at the school in accordance with identified needs, such as new health services for students including vaccinations, sexual health, support services and more • Identify evidence and research-based practices and/or partnerships that address priority areas for the community school strategy, which may include but are not limited to: Parent/Family Engagement; Community Engagement; Youth Development; Academic Rigor and Instructional Practices; Health and Mental Health; Tutoring; After school programming; Mentoring; and Early Childhood • Develop, maintain, and publicize a schedule of programs and expanded learning activities offered at the school • Identify needs of chronically absent students, apply interventions, and track and monitor impact of interventions including leading a weekly Attendance Team with key stakeholders • Collect and monitor program implementation data and student data for each partnership that allow easy data analysis and interaction by school stakeholders  2. The Student Sorter will be used on a daily, weekly, and monthly basis to identify and connect students (both subgroups and individuals) in need of personalized/individualized supports. Prevention initiatives and intervention initiatives will be tracked in the Student Sorter and this data will be analyzed regularly, in partnership with the CST and other key school stakeholders, to evaluate effectiveness and to implement new strategies as needed.  Streamlined referral processes will be implemented to ensure that school stakeholders know when and how to refer students and families in need of additional personalized supports that emerge throughout the school year. A tracking tool will also provide a way to ensure that referrals are followed up on and that services are delivered in accordance with the needs presented.  Partner programs will collaborate with teachers and others involved in instructional programming and regular points of engagement will be implemented throughout the year to ensure a cohesive instructional approach within and outside of the regular school day. 3. In partnership with the principal, the CSD will form and subsequently convene monthly meetings of a Community School Team (CST) whose membership will include: members of the School Leadership Team (SLT), other key school staff and/or faculty, key staff from other partner CBOs, parents, and students. Through this meeting, issues will be regularly communicated to and discussed by the group. The CSD will also work with the Parent Coordinator and identified parent leaders to define and implement strategic initiatives to better engage parents in their child’s education and support the community school. Planned initiatives designed to support authentic parent engagement include:  Monthly parent workshops through The Leadership Program  Monthly positive parent outreach -- parents of Achievement Mentoring mentees will receive specific positive progress updates from mentors on at least a monthly basis. 2  The principal, CSD and other members of the Student Success Team will meet for one period on a weekly basis to review the Student Sorter, using the meeting agenda protocol recommended by NYCDOE. During this meeting, the team will review attendance trends and specific student cases to identify and implement next steps and interventions. If questions arise about Student Sorter data, the CSD will serve as the school’s liaison to New Visions’ to address questions and build capacity within the school around Student Sorter proficiency. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 1. Partners include: 1. The Leadership Program CSD focus areas for the 18-19 school year include: (1) decreasing chronic absenteeism (2) increasing parent engagement and (3) youth development/social and emotional student supports. 2. The Community School Team will include: principal, parent leaders, teachers, CSD, representatives from The Leadership Program, and other community partners. A meeting will be provided prior to each meeting via email to all participants. Meetings will begin with a team-building “check-in” and proceed to review progress on community school goals. Meeting structures will be implemented (such as pair share, small group activities, etc.) to ensure equity of voice in providing feedback and input. Each meeting will end with time for reflection on the meeting, identifying “takeaways” and an email will be sent to the group by the CSD recapping the outcomes and next steps identified in the meeting. 3. The Student Sorter will be used on a daily, weekly, and monthly basis to identify and connect students (both subgroups and individuals) in need of personalized/individualized supports. Prevention initiatives and intervention initiatives will be tracked in the Student Sorter and this data will be analyzed regularly, in partnership with the CST and other key school stakeholders, to evaluate effectiveness and to implement new strategies as needed. Partner organizations will also be required to provide monthly reports documenting progress against stated outcomes and these updates will be discussed in monthly check-in meetings with the CSD. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. Peer Group Connection (PGC) 10th grade booster sessions will need to be scheduled into the 10th grade schedule and space will be needed on workshop days. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates.  Peer Group Connection (PGC): one 10th grade booster session will be held in fall 2017, one in winter 2018, and one in spring 2018.  Expanded Learning Time activities will start no later than October 2017 and will conclude May 2018. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan 3  Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 4  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 13 School Name Science Skills Center High School Borough Brooklyn School Number 419 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Dahlia McGregor Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Jhon Darel Claro Teacher/Subject Area Sharon Wexler/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Annetta Green/Science Related-Service Provider Theresa Rousell Superintendent Karen Watts Assistant Principal Desiny Kangas Coach N/A School Counselor Anderson Ali Parent Dawn Campbell Parent Coordinator Andrea Gomes Field Support Center Staff Member Tatyana Ulubabova Other (Name and Title) Edwin Rodriquez/Student C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 605 5 Total number of ELLs 28 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 4.63%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 4 3 K Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school uses a variety of assessment tools to assess early literacy skills of our ELLs. Students 8th grade assessements let us know whether they are a level 1,2,3, or 4 when beginning high school. Teacher created assessment is used to assess the literacy skills of our ELL students. As students make progress in their literacy skills Ed Performance (Scantron) and LightSail re used to identify grade level reading proficiency and lexile level. For new freshman, sophomores, juniors and seniors who took the NYSESLAT in the previous years, we use their data from the ATS report RNMR to assess their strengths and weaknesses when it comes to listening, speaking, reading and writing. Mr. Claro, our ESL certified teacher works with Assistant Principal, Destiny Kangas to create goals for students based on the data provided in the RNMR report. We also use student portfolios to assess more specific strengths and weaknesses in their reading and writing. In the fall, new ELL students take the LAB-R. Mr. Claro uses the scoring mask as well as the LAB-R Writing rubric to determine the students skills in reading and writing as well as to set reading and writing goals for those students. Lightsail literacy accelerator is used with in-text assessment that provides instant actionable data. Mr. Claro then uses this data to once again assess his students and to adjust goals 6  accordingly. Uniform midterms and finals are given in all departments. Midterms are given in November and finals are given in January. The results are used by teachers to assess students' areas of improvements as well as their weak areas. The departments meet to do item analysis for midterm and final exams. Mr. Claro is informed of the results and uses this information to goal set for students. In January, all students including ELLs take the ELA Regents. Destiny Kangas, the AP and the English teachers perform an item analysis of each multiple-choice question on the Regents. Mr. Claro uses this data to adjust his goals for his students as well as her curriculum to reflect the needs of her students. All of these exams and their results act as predictors for student performance on the NYSESLAT, which students will take in April and May as well as for the English Regents in June. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Teachers are required to utilize 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Each spring Mr. Claro, our ESL certified teacher and coordinator measures ELL students' progress by scheduling and administering the New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT). This test measures the progress of English language skills in listening, speaking, reading, and writing and determine proficiency levels (beginning, intermediate, advanced, proficient). The scores from the NYSESLAT helps us maximize ELL services and instruction to meet the varying needs of ELLs. Besides identifying for us which students should continue to receive ELL services, the NYSESLAT also helps us determine students language proficiency levels. This allows us to: -Place ELLs in programs that best fit their needs -Plan strategic homogeneous linguistic groupings -Determine how much instructional time should be spent in the native language and English (as part of the City LAP) -Determine the most suitable amounts of English as a Second Language and English Language Arts instruction time 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Paste response to question here: 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The overall NYSESLAT result shows that the majority of students 20 out of the 28 who took the NYSESLAT last year scored at the intermediate or advanced level. Half of our ELL population is at the intermediate level. We have 8 students who scored at the beginning level. This year, the majority of our Beginners are 9th and 10th graders (7). The majority of intermediate students are 9th graders (4students) and the majority of our advanced students are 12th graders (5 students). Last year we had 31 ELLs. This year we have 28 ELLs. As a result of this population, we have had to adjust our program for all levels of ELLs especially when it comes to literacy. We have students who can barely read and write in English, while others are able to read and write complex essays. We have had to adjust our curriculum, goal setting, and assessment tools to reflect this change 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming 7  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Beginning students have three periods of ESL classes (English, Reading and Writing) and then take four or five other subject area classes with the general population. Intermediate students take two periods of ESL classes (English and usually Writing, but it depends on the students NYSESLAT scores) and five or six other subject area classes with the general population. Advanced students take one ESL course (usually Writing, but it could be Reading - depending on their NYSESLAT scores) and six or seven other subject area classes with the general population. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Our program has heterogeneous (mixed proficiency levels) classes, with the exception of our two Beginning Level Reading classes which all of our beginners take together. We currently have Mr. C;laro with certification in ESL, teaching the 5 periods of ESL courses this year for our 42 students. Our instructional periods are 46 minutes long. NYS CR Part 154: We offer beginning students 3 instructional periods of 46 minutes 5 days a week for a total of 690 minutes per week. We offer intermediate students 2 instructional periods of 46 minutes 5 days a week for a total of 460 minutes per week. We offer our advanced students 1 instructional period of 46 minutes 5 days a week for a total of 230 minutes per week and 230 minutes per week. Mr. Claro (our certified ESL teacher) is able to teach all of the ELL periods because of our heterogeneous grouping. He teaches 5 periods for ELL students. There are beginning, intermediate, and advanced students in all 5 of these periods. Most beginners have period 3, and 4. Most intermediate students have periods 5 and 6. Advanced students are placed in periods 6 and 7. Advanced students' placement is dependent on programming issues and graduation requirements as well as for grouping purposes. Period 1, 3 and 7are Mr. Claro smallest classes. Period 1 has 11 students while period 7 has13 students. Period 5 and 6 are the largest classes with 25 students in period 5 and 19 students in period 6. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our Language Allocation Policy focuses on the development of literacy through all four language modalities with a strong emphasis on writing. To best do this, all of our teachers are integrating the Common Core Learning standards and performance tasks in their instruction - Ms. Sharon Wexler, a member of the School’s Common Core team is assisting teachers to infuse literacy into all content areas. Our LAP must also support the use of language and content objectives in the content area classes since, in a free-standing ESL program, students receive content area instruction in English. Common planning meetings are held every Wednesdays & Thursdays throughout the year so that teachers can discuss students' needs and can plan effective instruction to support their needs. All teachers are also scheduled for Common Prep periods. Students with low literacy in their own language and students with interrupted formal education are identified through their responses to questions on the Home Language Survey and teacher evaluations. These students are strongly encouraged through parental contact and guidance to participate in tutorial programs, and after school Title III sessions. Teachers are aware of youngsters' 8  need and differentiate instruction to accommodate and support their needs. Classroom libraries are in place for these youngsters. Independent reading is required for all ELLs. Our instructional program is designed to include ESL, English Language Arts and content area instruction that is aligned to the New York State ESL, ELA standards, and common core standards and that meets all the CR part 154 requirements. This instruction includes scaffolding of academic language and complex content. It engages students through teaching language and structure in context with the use of visuals, realia, and other scaffolding strategies that promote student achievement. Materials and texts that connect to students' interest and experiences help them make connections to prior knowledge and to access new information. The program emphasizes the Principles of Learning, the Common Core Learning Standards and the use of academic language for oral and written discourse. English Language Learners with special needs participate in the same standards-based program as all Science Skills Center High School students while receiving the support they need to achieve as indicated on their Individual Education Plan 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Since this may not always remain the case, we have created a system where we keep portfolios of our ELLs work from one year to the next. This acts as a reminder to their instructors as what the ELLs had been doing and what they struggled with. We find that keeping this information and sharing it with others instructors and with the ELLs everyone is on the same page as to our students' zone of proximal development and where they are ready to be challenged. This approach also help us to assess their progress over time and use the data gathered to make instructional and curricular changes. The data also provide information that will help students to do better on other assignments. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Students in this country for three years or less are often grouped with students who share the same native language and have been in this country longer and are more proficient in English. With this in mind, our guidance counselors and program chair, Delia Joseph program students together in content area classes so that they can act as supports for one another. Furthermore, newcomers are given laptop computers, dictionaries and glossaries to be used in content area classes. Mr. Claro, our ELL certified teacher, pushes into content area classes for beginners on an as needed basis. Students with low literacy in their native language (including Long Term ELLs and ELLs receiving 4 to 6 year of services) and students with interrupted formal education (SIFE) are identified through ATS reports, results on NYSESLAT, ELL Periodic Assessment, Acuity, and ELA regents results. These students are strongly encouraged though parental contact and guidance to participate in tutorial programs, and after school Title III sessions. Literacy, project-based learning and infusing technology are instructional strategies in place when working with SIFE, Long-term ELLs and ELLs in this country for 4 to 6 years. Teachers are aware of youngsters' needs and differentiate instruction to accommodate and support their needs. Additionally, special literacy classes for ELLs in these categories are in place and there are classroom libraries to provide the students with additional reading materials. Instruction focuses on the development of literacy through all four language modalities with a strong emphasis on reading and writing. During common planning meetings throughout the year teachers discuss and identify students' needs and plan effective instruction to support the identified needs. What we have found is that many of our students once they reach high school have already been in ESL for several years. These students speak and understand English, but have poor reading and writing skills. Often we see a link between this and their weak reading and writing skills in their native language, although they speak the language fluently. As a result they do not transfer the reading and writing skills from their first language to their second. They are well-versed in the BICS, but struggle at gaining and retaining the CALPS for all the content areas. When placed in ESL, these youngsters read high interest, low-level novels, short stories and newspaper articles. Varied writing activities and hands-on projects are designed to increase reading and writing proficiency. Advanced level youngsters who have difficulty writing essays focus on preparing for 9  the ELA Regents as they discuss and review comprehensions of works of literature and non-fiction. Achieve 3000 and Plato are also used. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? English Language Learners receive an instructional program with the same emphasis on academic rigor as our entire student population. They attend classes with the entire student body. They are expected to produce original student work that reflects comprehension of academic principles and concepts as well as proficiency in different modes of academia. They exhibit academic and technical proficiency in the use of technology to go research, communicate new learning, and create products that require multi-step tasks and self-monitoring strategies. Students also engage in group discussions that require problem solving, analysis of evidence and data, peer-conferencing, and the use of oral and written academic language. ELLs are required to use technology in each class project assigned during each semester. All ELLs are given access to laptop computers in the ESL and other content area classes. Student projects as well as research is done using the computers. ESL and content area teachers use Test Wizard and Castle Learning as tools to support their lessons as well as for students' use. Lessons are taught using Smart boards in all classes. It is part of Science Skills Center High Schools instructional goals to infuse technology into all its programs. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? LL with Special NEEDs: Through weekly common planning meetings and another common prep period we discuss with the Special Education teachers and paras strategies, materials, and curriculum that are being used in the ESL classes and can be continued in the resource room. Our goal is to make sure there is continuity of instruction between both departments. The Special Education teachers also share differentiation strategies that have been successful with our students. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Science Skills Center High School is committed to the principles that every student deserves a quality education. It is our mission to provide a quality education in a safe and supportive environment. The program for our English Language Learners has been designed, planned, and fine-tuned to reflect our shared commitment to educate our youngsters, excite them about learning and shape them into contributing members of our American society. ELL Supplemental Support: ALL ELL students have access to the same supplemental programs offered to general education students. They are encouraged to take credit recovery classes after-school and attend after-school tutoring given by each department in addition to the After-school and Saturday Academy. ELLs also have access to Lightsail, Rosetta Stone (Levels I, II, III), Pocket Translators, bilingual dictionaries and glossaries. In addition, ELL students who have demonstrated need for additional support are offered after-school tutoring, where a content area-teacher will be supported with a fully licensed ESL teacher using a push-in model. The extra-time, help and support assists these youngsters in meeting the English Language Arts standards and Common Core Standards. Other newcomers who are evaluated by the LAB-R and are found to be entitled to services are placed according to their results. On content areas assessment, it has been found that our ELLs are struggling to pass their Global History Regents and ELA Regents exams even though we have seen a vast improvement last year from previous years. We will as we did last year continue to use title III after-school tutoring and Saturday Academy to provide our ELLs with additional help to further assist them in preparing for these examinations as well as developing skills and vocabulary to help them in their respective content areas. The After-School Academy will focus on ELA, Living Environment and Global History regents preparation. All ELLs who failed the class or regents or were absent from the exam are to participate in the after-school program. The Saturday Academy Program will focus on better preparing ELLs for the Math and ELA regents exams. In the After-School Academy and Saturday Academy Programs students will receive instruction through licensed content-area 0  teachers. LEP students will be supported directly by two ESL licensed teachers. The After-school Academy Program will take place two-days a week for an hour and a half each day. The Saturday Academy will take place every Saturday for 8 weeks. Instruction will take place for a total of three hours each Saturday. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? mprovements to our program: Improvements to Our Programs: Last year, we wanted to improve our program by not having every class be as heterogeneous as it was. We wanted to have one period with only the beginners, so they could really get individualized attention and work with other students on a similar level. We wanted to continue with mixing beginners, intermediate and advanced students for other periods because we didn't want students to miss opportunities to take the elective classes that they might be interested in. This year, we can say that we have come closer to achieving this, but still need to continue making improvements to the programming so that it matches our vision. Another way, we wanted to improve the program last year was to increase the number of computers in the ELL classrooms from one to at least six. Our ELL classroom now has a mini iPads and laptop cart with sixteen computers for our students to use. All ELL content area teachers secure laptops for ELLs to use on a daily basis as well as use Smartboard technology in their classrooms. We are continuing to look for grant opportunities to further infuse technology into all classes. This year, we hope to begin our Title III after-school and Saturday tutoring earlier in the year so we can assist students in their non-ESL courses as an intervention to ensure their success. Lightsail and Castle Learning will be used both in day classes as well as in after-school and Saturday programs. We also want to continue to increase the number of books on tape and improve our ELL classroom library by adding many more books that are leveled and interest appropriate. We want to expand the content area classroom libraries by getting audiobooks for ELLs. We are also looking this year to improve professional development to teachers about how to differentiate instruction for ELLs in content area courses. The two Listening Stations will be utilized during the instructional day. As we did last year, we will continue to invite parents to attend our Saturday Academy where they will continue to receive Beginner ESL classes, which will help them to navigate along with their child's aspects of the four years that their child will be in high school. In addition, parents will get to use Rosetta Stone (Levels I, II, and II) and English Discoveries to improve their English, and they will also learn about other computer software programs being used to help their children in their classes, i.e. PLATO and Achieve 3000. Ancillary instructional materials in support of content areas will be purchased. These will include microphones, picture dictionaries to be used by parents and their adolescents. Also, additional licenses for Rosetta Stone will be purchased as well as supporting materials to ELL textbooks, i.e. Milestones, will be purchased. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We have no programs or services that will be discontinued because we have seen an increase in the number of ELLs we are servicing. We will continue to improve upon what was done last year. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our ESL students are integrated though out the programs offered in our school. All ESL students have the same amount of access to all programs as other students. After school supplementary classes are offered in the four core subject areas and teachers are also available for the 1st hour after school to assist our ESL students with any challenge that they are facing academically. Our instructional program is designed to include ESL, English Language Arts and content area instruction that is aligned to the New York State ESL, ELA standards, and common core standards and that meets all the CR part 154 requirements. This instruction includes scaffolding of academic language and complex content. It engages students through teaching language and structure in context with the use of visuals, realia, and other scaffolding strategies that promote student achievement. Materials and texts that connect to students' interest and experiences help them make connections to prior knowledge and to access new information. The program emphasizes the Principles of Learning and the use of academic 1  language for oral and written discourse. English Language Learners with special needs participate in the same standards-based program as all Science Skills Center High School students while receiving the support they need to achieve as indicated on their Individual Education Plans. English as a Second Language will focus on the standards. Classes will includes activities where: -Students will listen, speak, read, and write in English for information and understanding. Students learning English as a second language will use English to acquire, interpret, and apply and transmit information for content area learning and personal use. They will develop and use skills and strategies appropriate to their level of English proficiency to collect data, facts, and ideas; discover relationships, concepts, and generalizations; and use knowledge generated from oral, written, and electronically produced texts. -Students will listen, speak, read, and write in English for literary response, enjoyment, and expression. Students learning English as a Second language will use English for self expression, artistic creation, and participation in popular culture. They will develop and use skills and strategies appropriate to their level of English proficiency to listen to, read and respond to oral, written, and electronically produced texts and performances, relate texts and performance to their own lives and other works, and develop an understanding of the diverse social, historical, and cultural dimensions the text and performances represent. -Students will listen, speak, read and write in English for critical analysis and evaluation. Students learning English as a second language will use English to express their opinions and judgments on experiences, messages, ideas, information, and issues from a variety of perspectives. They will develop and use skills and strategies appropriate to their level of English Language Proficiency to reflect on and analyze experiences, messages, ideas, information and issues presented by others using a variety of established criteria. -Students will listen, speak, read and write in English for classroom and social interaction. Students learning English as a second language will use English to interact with others in social and classroom situations. They will develop and use skills and strategies appropriate to their level of English proficiency to communicate effectively with regard to audience, purpose and setting. -Students will demonstrate cross-cultural knowledge and sensitivity in communicating with others of different social, cultural, and linguistic backgrounds. They will develop and use culturally appropriate behaviors, and knowledge of local U.S. cultures and practices, in their interactions with others in their new cultural environment. Support of standards will be evident by student work, board work, lesson plans and interviews with teachers. Additionally, every classroom will have the appropriate standards posted for maximum student awareness. A greater emphasis will be placed on interdisciplinary instruction in all of the English as a Second Language classes. Students with low literacy in their own language and students with interrupted formal education (SIFE) are identified through their responses to questions on the Home Language Survey and teacher evaluations. These students are strongly encouraged though parental contact and guidance to participate in tutorial programs, and after school Title III sessions. Teachers are aware of youngsters' needs and differentiate instruction to accommodate and support their needs. Additionally, special literacy classes for ELLs in this category are in place and there are classroom libraries to provide the students with additional reading materials. Instruction focuses on the development of literacy through all four language modalities with a strong emphasis on reading and writing. During common planning meetings throughout the year teachers discuss and identify students' needs and plan effective instruction to support the identified needs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. nglish Language Learners receive an instructional program with the same emphasis on academic rigor as our entire student population. They attend classes with the entire student body. They are expected to produce original student work that reflects comprehension of academic principles and concepts as well as proficiency in different modes of academia. They exhibit academic and technical proficiency in the use of technology to go research, communicate new learning, and create products that require multi-step tasks and self-monitoring strategies. Students also engage in group discussions that require problem solving, analysis of evidence and data, peer-conferencing, and the use of oral and written academic language. ELLs are required to use technology in each class project assigned during each semester. All ELLs are given access to laptop computers in the ESL and other content area classes. Student projects as well as research is done using the computers. ESL 2  and content area teachers use Castle Learning as well as Test Wizard as tools to support their lessons as well as for students' use. Lessons are taught using Smartboards in all classes. It is part of Science Skills Center High Schools instructional goals to infuse technology into all its programs. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In our ESL model, students receive bilingual dictionaries, glossaries and are given translators to be used in school and at home. Translators are supplied when needed. In class, students who speak the same language are grouped together to act as supports. Students who speak the same language are grouped together in content area classes. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All content is age and grade level appropriate. ELL Curriculum Texts and Resources: At the ELL beginning Level the texts Rewards Multi-syllabic Word Reading Strategies, Bridges to Literature Level 1 (McDougal Litell), Visions (A), Milestones (A), High Point (A) and English Discoveries and Rosetta Stone computer software are used. Students are also required to complete 3-5 leveled books of choice from the independent reading library. (Students at all three levels read graphic novels.) These students receive three periods of instruction daily totaling six hundred and forty-five minutes of instruction per week. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? nglish Language Learners receive an instructional program with the same emphasis on academic rigor as our entire student population. They attend classes with the entire student body. They are expected to produce original student work that reflects comprehension of academic principles and concepts as well as proficiency in different modes of academia. They exhibit academic and technical proficiency in the use of technology to go research, communicate new learning, and create products that require multi-step tasks and self-monitoring strategies. Students also engage in group discussions that require problem solving, analysis of evidence and data, peer-conferencing, and the use of oral and written academic language. ELLs are required to use technology in each class project assigned during each semester. All ELLs are given access to laptop computers in the ESL and other content area classes. Student projects as well as research is done using the computers. ESL and content area teachers use Castle Learning as well as Test Wizard as tools to support their lessons as well as for students' use. Lessons are taught using Smartboards in all classes. It is part of Science Skills Center High Schools instructional goals to infuse technology into all its programs. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). For Intermediate level we use High Point (B and C), Visions (B), Bridges to Literature (Green) and adapted classic novels with DVD recording of the text such as The Call of the Wild, Treasure Island, and The Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde. Students are also required to complete 5 to 7 leveled books of choice from the independent reading library. Intermediate Level students receive four hundred and thirty minutes of ESL instruction per week. At the advanced level the novels including Macbeth, The Chocolate War, To Kill a Mockingbird, The Miracle Worker, When I Was a Puerto Rican, Things Fall Apart, A Doll's House, Flowers for Algernon, The Pearl, Animal Farm, Of Mice and Men as well as many short stories including "Rappuccini's Daughter," "The Curious Case of Benjamin Button," "The Lottery," "The Secret Life of Walter Mitty," "Harrison Bergeron" to name a few. The short stories are accompanied with films, which students use for comprehension as well as analysis of techniques and viewpoints used across the two medium of text and film. Advanced level students who are juniors also develop vocabulary using Vocabulary Cartoons Books I and II, Vocabulary for the College Bound and on a daily basis they are given sponge activities using the vocabulary program Meanings in Opposition. Students also read the novels Tooth and Nail and Test of Time, which are SAT vocabulary building novels. Advanced level are required to complete 7 -10 leveled books of choice from the independent reading library. Advanced level students are required to complete 7-10 leveled books of choice from the independent reading library. Advanced level students receive two hundred and fifteen minutes of ELA instruction. As data reflects most of our ELLs are at intermediate levels of proficiency across all grades. Our students' reading levels showed variations among individual students. Most students across all grades showed the highest need for the development of reading and writing proficiency. The teachers of long term ELLs who have been identified 3  by the extension of services report are informed of the areas where progress is most needed. These students need assistance so that instruction can be tailored to meet their needs. Eleventh grade students who fall into this category are programmed for an ELA regent's preparation class to enhance their writing skills, encouraged to attend our title III tutoring sessions after school and on Saturdays. Writing workshops afterschool and during the Saturday Academy are offered to the long term ELLs and other ELLs who have demonstrated deficiency in reading and writing. All students including ELLs are invited to Science Skills Center High School Orientation Program during the summer. For the last four years our incoming freshman were invited to a bridge program specifically created to help students ELLs included transition from junior high school to high school. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Science Skills Center High School recognizes the importance of language and culture in the development of a school community that includes all students and their families. We are committed to making sure that parents and others understand our Language Allocation Policy and the design of our free-standing ESL program. Although we would like to offer our ELL students instruction in many more languages other than English, only two language electives (Spanish & French) are currently offer students. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All Schooll staff: Most of the ELL professional development we have is done on-site by members of our school community. We have weekly common planning and professional development meetings in addition to a monthly department and faculty meeting. Meetings focus on instructional issues or teachers conference on the progress of individual students. Additionally, content area teachers articulate and collaborate with ESL teachers to facilitate English language academic vocabulary and content area learning. The ESL teachers work on curriculum development and professional development with and for the other subject teachers in our school. As mandated under CR Part 154, our ELLs receive ESL instruction according to their English language proficiency level and content area instruction from a content-licensed teacher using ESL methodology. Because nearly all of our professional development is focused on differentiating instruction, the workshops are constantly assisting teachers in creating curriculum and strategies to meet these needs of all individuals students and sub-groups, especially our ELL students. Paraprofessionals also participate in these meetings. In addition to our own staff providing ESL PD, we have lokk for scheduled PD by the DOE ELL dept who provides the City with PD. Mid-Year we add up all of the hours of PD and make sure we schedule some extra workshops during some of our weekly PDs and make sure we schedule some extra workshops to ensure we have 10 or more hours by the end of the year. We have a lot of professional development for staff on using RLAT to identify ELL students in their course, how to use RLAT data to group students based on their needs, and how to seek out Ms. Garry, our ELL coordinator, to assist in meeting the varied needs of the ELLs. Ms. Garry will often puch-in to a content area teachers class to work with ELLs to model for the content area teacher strategies that can be used in the content area classroom to support ELLs. In addition, we provide training for content-area teachers on the testing modifications ELL students are permitted and how to assist ELLs in using translation glossaries in their courses. Paste response to question here: 4  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Support Staff: Although we do not have any bilingual teachers, the occupational and physical therapists working for our school meet once a month with Ms. Babick, our certified ESL teacher and ELL coordinator, for training on how to work productively with ELL students and for strategies to help them meet with specific needs of students they are working with. Assistant Principals: Our school has 2 insructional assistant principals. Taalib Brown, A.P. (who is also the supervisor of the ELL program attends the ELL profesional development workshops that are given by the DOE, in addition to the EA-Special Services Manager ELL Compliance/Performance Specialist from the Borough Field Support Center provide hands on instruction on site for him, Ms. Garry, our ELL coordinator, and other APs. also attends (often with the ELL coordinator) ELL workshops that are offered from the DOE and other educational organizations. She then turnkeys this information to all of the other 2 APs at cabinet meetings and staff at on site workshops. ESL Staff: ESL teachers meet regularly and participate in city-wide and regional professional development. The ESL staff participated in the West-Ed Quality teaching for English Language Learners program (Building the Base, English Language Arts, QTEL Beginners). In house professional development focuses on the development of students' reading and writing skills, diversifying instruction and assessment, meeting the needs of ELLs, and looking at student writing. Additionally, academic language development is planned for in school with special consideration to scaffolding strategies, use and incorporation of visuals and providing classroom teachers with strategies for success. The workshop model is used in all classes. ESL teachers teachers participate in peer inter-visitation with content area teachers and lesson studies where the focus is developing academic rigor in a thinking environment while supporting the needs of all learners. Furthermore, Ms. Garry, our ELL coordinator, attends monthly trainings led AP Brown. Our school has designed our PD to ensure that 15% of the PD received by all teachers is based on to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners For our English as a New Language teachers, a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required professional development hours must be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our school make outeach to parents to set up meeting at a mutual time for parents to meet with the ESL teacher to discuss goals for our program, students assessment data, lanuaguse development progress and needs in all content areas. Students progress are reviewed prior to seting up meeting-this way, meetings are set up with only teachers who the students need the most support in their classes. Translation and interpreation services are perovided at these meeting. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Each school year a monthly ESL parent calendar id created bsed on the needs of our parents. They participate in this meeting and the PTA, SLT and other committees to assist the school with projects. 5  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 6 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Dahlia Mcgregor, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 7  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: SCIENCE SKILLS CENTER HIGH SCH School DBN: 13K419 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) DAHLIA MCGREGOR Title Principal KATURA COPENNY Assistant Principal ANDREA GOMES Parent Coordinator JHON DAREL CLARO ENL/Bilingual Teacher CARL WILLIAMS Parent ISMAIL SALEM Teacher/Subject Area ANNETTA GREEN Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach ANDERSON ALI School Counselor KAREN WATTS Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Edwin Rodriquez Other STUDENT Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 8  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 13K419 School Name: Science Skills Center High School Superintendent: Karen Watts The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Jhon Darel Claro Teacher Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Our school has all new students completing the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) for us to identify the preferred language to communicate with parents. ATS data is used on the spoken and written language is also retrieved and reviewed to gather more data on parents language of choice for communication. Our school's Parent Coordinator is also responsible to review all Emergency Blue Cards for all new and incoming students to update the list of preferred language communication for parents. This data is analysed and the school maintains a list of the names of the parents and their preferred language of communication. All correspondence to parents that required another language than English is translated in the preferred language of communication. ENL teacher also use a survey to collect data from the parents. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 9  Arabic Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Bengali (Bangla in Bangladesh) Cantonese Chinese Dialect English French French Hatian Creole Fulani Haitian Creole Hebrew Mandarin Polish Russian Spanish Urdu Yoruba 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Spanish Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 0  Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Language teachers in the school translate the documents Principal translate documents Families 1. School Leadership Team (SLT) & Parent Teachers' Association Annual Calendar for the upcoming school year ( in June) June 29th 2. The school's welcome letter to parents (in July of each year) 3. Clubs and Other Extra-curricular activities (1 st week in September) 4. Extended day/ After school Academic Programs- school letter and schedule ( Last week in September and February) 5. Parent & Student Hand book (In September of each school year) 6. Mouthy Parents Newsletter (1 st week in each month) 7, NYS Regents Testing Schedule ( In September) 8. Assessment Calendar & Marking Period Dates with progress report distribution dates (1 st week of school in September) July 1st 9. Monthly letter from principal to parents (1 st week of each month) 10. Invitations to school activities to parents September, January and April of each year) 11. Annual College Fairs September 12. Letter with dates for parents to visit classrooms with Principal each month(September & February) 13. Parent Coordinator Welcome letter for new parents (July) 14. Summer Bridge Program letter to incoming 9 th and 10 th grade students (in May of each year) 15. Letter encouraging Parents to complete School Learning Environment Survey 9 February) 16. Letter to inform parents of our annual Advanced Placement (AP) Night ( in March) 17. Parent Book Club dates (Letter sent to parents 1 st week in August 1  18. Annual Science Fair and Symposium invitation to parents 19. Parent Welcome Packet 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? 1. College and Readiness meeting with parents and student to complete College Now Form August 2. Back to school Night in September to welcome parents and she the course content and curriculum with parents 3. Disciplinary conference with parents, students and guidance counselor 4. Monthly parent consultation meeting with principal 5. School Leadership meeting with parents 6. PTA executive board meeting with Parents 7. Guidance Academic intervention conference with parents and students 6. Parent-teacher conference (scheduled as a meeting to harness parent support to increase student outcomes) 7. Attendance Coordinator conference with parents 8. Principal Conference with parents 9. IEP meetings 10. Parents meeting with School Psychologist 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 2  Phone Messenger translates messages in various languages Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Our Language allocation Coordinator makes sure that all parents receive school notification in their 1st language. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) All parents will receive notification of the Parents' Bill of Right through the "Parent Welcome Packet." A welcome poster is displayed in the main lobby of our school and our main office with the 7 languages. A parent guide to language access will also be included in the welcome packet for all parents. Our security desk has the language ID card that they use with parents to inform us of the Translation and interpretation services needed for parents. The Parent Coordinator also use the Language ID card for parents to identify the language they speak to get translation services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parents will be asked to complete a brief survey for us to gather data on the translation & interpretation services that we provide for them. This data will be used to assist us in improving our translation and interpretation services for parents. 3 
