 15K423 School Name: BROOKLYN FRONTIERS HIGH SCHOOL Principal: ALONA COHEN   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Brooklyn Frontier High School 15K423 331500011423 9-12 School Number (DBN): 112 Schermerhorn Street, Brooklyn, NY 11201 718-722-4727 Phone Number: 718-722-7219 Fax: Alona Cohen Acohen6@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Email Address: Alona Cohen Eric Wilson Marie Content AlonaCohen KayereatheaBoyd Justin Rodriguez YamileMedina Millie Henriquez-McArdle CBO Representative: Geographical District: 15 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Paul Rotondo Superintendent: Office of Superintendents Division of Transfer High Schools 1150 East New York Avenue Suite 304 Brooklyn, New York 11212 protond@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address:   646-654-1261 646-654-1742 Phone Number: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Brooklyn North Bernadette Fitzgerald FSC: Executive Director: Brooklyn North BFSC, 131 Livingston Street, Rm 501, Brooklyn, NY 11201 Executive Director’s Office Address: BFitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718 935 3954 Phone Number: 7189354314 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Alona Cohen Eric Wilson Marie Content Marvin Bracey KayereatheaBoyd Justin Rodriguez YamileMedina *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Millie Henriquez McArdle CBO Representative, if applicable Sonya Foreman Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent   Regina Shields Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/ Staff Member Member/ Staff Member Member/ Teacher Member/ CBO Representative Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Brooklyn Frontiers High School serves students who are over-age and under-credited. We are a safe, supportive environment that values each individual. We support community members of all interests, talents and backgrounds to define themselves and shine. We have high academic and personal expectations and are dedicated to the success of all of our students. We build authentic relationships based on respect and trust. Students will have voice and ownership over their learning. Members of our community, including staff and students, work together   collaboratively. Students will be supported and empowered to overcome challenges they face so that they can be successful in high school and in their future lives. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Brooklyn Frontiers High School serves students who are two years overage who are entering high school for the first time directly out of middle school, as well as transfer students who have been to high school for a minimum of one year and are looking for a new opportunity to be successful. We have an integrated partnership with Good Shepherd Services. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The majority of our students present with gaps in their literacy and numeracy skills. The vast majority of our students are classified overage and under credited. Approximately 50% of students have IEPs. Until the 2017-18 academic year, our school exclusively served students entering from middle school who have been held over twice in elementary and/or middle school. We now also serve students who have already attended high school for at least one year and have fallen behind academically. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which BFHS made the most progress over the past year have been Collaborative Teachers and Supportive Environment. For Collaborative Teachers, a group of teachers worked with Good Shepherds Counselors/Coaches as part of our Student Support Team (SST) structure. Each SST includes a teacher and coach who work in collaboration to support a set caseload of students. The SST meets a minimum of one time per trimester with each student on their caseload to discuss the student’s academic progress towards graduation, including the most up to date information about the student’s credit accumulation and credit needs. The SSTs also work with students to set academic goals to support their credit accumulation towards graduation. For Supportive Environment, in the 2017/18 school year all teachers integrated Community Engagement (CE) into their classrooms. CE includes teaching and supporting students to work with and support their peers. CE includes providing students with consistent feedback on their progress in supporting and collaborating with their peers. All teachers experienced multiple professional development sessions in which staff defined CE, developed strategies for integrating into their classes and refined their CE approaches over the course of the school year. Our key areas of focus for 2018-19 are increasing the rigor of instruction and creating a more supportive environment. We plan to leverage the growth we have made in developing student to student peer collaboration in the classroom to continue to develop discussions and tie these skills to Regents exam skills. 0  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 15K423 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 168 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 2 2 3 3 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 5 6 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) 1 1 School Composition (2017-18) 91.0% % Attendance Rate 88.1% % Reduced Lunch 6.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.6% 19.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7.23 4% 19% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 50% 24% 40.5% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A NO YES No N/A 101 101 1 74.0% 3.0% 50.0% 78.0% 0.0% 1.2% 4 37% 4.1 N/A N/A 48% 45% 37.7% N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: ● Shared curricula promote consistency across classrooms : Teachers developed and codified curricula for a portion of core courses. The curricula include curriculum maps, outcome maps, unit plans and individual lessons and materials. Because Brooklyn Frontiers only admits students who have been held over twice or who have been unsuccessful in their previous high schools, many students enter with significant academic deficits. It has been necessary for teachers to develop custom curricula to meet their specific needs and develop a pathway for them to achieve New York State graduation standards. Teachers use CCLS and NYS standards to plan content outcomes collaboratively during department meetings and organize them over course sequences. Individual teachers then write each course component and submit it for review. This process creates curriculum across classes that consistently supports students. ● Outcomes-based instructional system creates clarity for both teachers and students around mastery of skills: All courses are developed by teachers using an outcomes based system which define the competences that students must demonstrate mastery of in order to earn credit. Each credit-bearing course is composed of six course specific and four school-wide outcomes. The school-wide outcomes (Extract, Justify, Communicate, Reflect) are derived from Common Core standards and, given all of our students’ past academic challenges, are repeated in all courses in order to reinforce these skills. ● Focus on problem solving rather than task completion: The math department has shifted to teaching problem solving strategies rather than algorithms for addressing specific problems.  Needs: For the 2018-19 school year, we will need to build on the work in which we have engaged to increase the rigor of classroom tasks and discussions and translate them into the requirements for Regents exams. This year, we observed a decline in Regents exam pass rates as indicated by ATS data from 2016-17 exams and 2017-18 exams. While, given the standards of the new pathways available to our students (half of whom have IEPs), this has not hampered their prospective graduation, we believe that their progress and overall performance in class can be better mirrored in the Regents exam performance. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students’ Regents exam passing rates will increase by 10% across subject areas. 3 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Department facilitators will meet with the principal weekly in order to create agendas for meetings. Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based  instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Lesson Study: We will continue to develop our Lesson Study approach to improve pedagogy through our affiliation with the Learning Partners Plus program. For our lesson study, all departments will select foci that are will lead to end of the year goals of increasing students’ abilities to engage in higher order thinking as evidenced by their ability to solve complex problems and engage in high level discussions. This year, we will also introduce a separate Lesson Study. The departments will meet every other week for a 135 minute block. The lesson study process involves identification of target student skills, development of a jointly planned lesson to develop the identified skills, observation of the lesson and collection of student work by all teachers who planned the lesson, analysis of student work relative to identified target skills, and reflection of the process. A new 4 All teachers September 2018 – June 2019 All of our students are overage and under-credited and therefore do not constitute a subgroup. All teachers, academic advisors, students, GSS staff September 2018 – June 2019 The data specialist will be responsible for supporting staff members in the use of JumpRope. All Parents September 2018 – June 2019 All Content Teachers September 2018- June 2019 The data specialist will work with the Parent Coordinator and PTA to schedule workshops and recruit participants. He will lead each workshop. Department facilitators will work in collaboration with the principal to lead the work with teachers. All DOE and GSS Staff January, February, March, June 2019 Data Specialist and Principal round of lesson study is developed based on the analysis. Each round lasts approximately two months. As lessons and pedagogical approaches are developed through Lesson Study, teachers specifically design instruction so as to create broad access for all students. Teachers will select classrooms in order to carry out the jointly developed lessons. Individual academic progress monitoring meetings will occur once approximately every 3 weeks to flag students who are in need of interventions while they still have an opportunity to pass classes. Engage parents in workshops to teach them how to use our student database, JumpRope, to understand their children's progress. Thursday department meeting time will be focusing on a) analyzing Regents data for students to identify instructional needs b) developing and implementing instructional shifts within credit-bearing classes to address needs c) developing and implementing instructional shift in un-credited AIS classes and after-school to address needs At the conclusion of each trimester, we will meet as a full staff to review data and trends with regards to credit accumulation. In Feb of 2019 we will analyze the January 2019 Regents results. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 5  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Throughout the school year, we will engage parents in workshops to teach them how to use our student database, JumpRope, to understand their children's progress. The data specialist will work with the Parent Coordinator and PTA to schedule workshops and recruit participants. He will lead each workshop. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. · Department Facilitators will lead each biweekly Lesson Study meeting. Facilitators will meet with the principal weekly to discuss progress and develop agendas · 2 model teachers funded through the Learning Partner Program will serve as “Lead Learners” who will open up their classrooms as learning sites · Professional development time has been added to biweekly meetings on lesson study in departments in order to create longer blocks of PD time -Twice per month, Thursday department meeting time will be used to better align instructional practices with Regents exam expectations. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, we will observe a 5% increase in Regents passing rates as compared to the 2017-18 school year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) STARS data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strengths: - All teachers now integrate Community Engagement (CE) into their classes. This integration of CE includes teaching students how to support each other and effectively work together in class, as well as tracking students CE progress and giving them feedback. When surveyed at the end of the year using a teacher/ admin team created online survey, all teachers reported progress in their classes relative to integrating CE into their classes. - The partnership with Good Shepherd Services allows us to provide supports and services not usually available in high schools. Good Shepherd Services is an integrated partner, providing supports that are critical to the functioning of the school. The daily attendance outreach, individual counseling and small group advisories have helped develop students’ skills to effectively function in a high school setting. Given that we exclusively serve students who are either entering high school after having been held back twice previously in elementary and middle school, or who have been unsuccessful in their previous high school, this type of growth as a result of the support provided by GSS is especially significant. Needs: - Align CE instruction to assessment and feedback, including developing systems and approaches for regular assessment and feedback that can be integrated into classes across the curriculum. This is need was identified through the in-house survey, Advance data for domains 3c (2.76) and 3d (2.87). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. All classes will have a documented plan for instruction, assessment and feedback of students relative to CE skills by March 2019. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional Development at the start of the year will focus on developing CE approaches/strategies and creating classroom systems for aligning for tracking students' CE progress and for giving feedback. Given the high rate of OA/UC students and SWD (~50%), all strategies developed to ensure that the needs of these students are addressed. All teachers September 2018 Principal and Assistant Principal Monthly grade level meetings in which teachers share progress relative to CE feedback and tracking alignment All teachers Chancellor's Conference Days will be focused on development of development CE instructional approaches and on alignment of CE feedback and tracking. All teachers and GSS coaches Curriculum Map Revision process to include CE instructional approaches and alignment of CE feedback and tracking. All teachers Model Teachers DOE/GSS Administrators, Model Teachers Principal September 2108 to June 2019 November 2018, January 2019, June 2019 January 2018, June 2019 Teacher observation feedback to include a stated focus on integration of CE instruction, feedback and tracking. All teachers Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principal LPP Triad focus on CE development in all schools to develop instructional approaches that can be shared across all of the transfer schools in the triad. LPP Triad members Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. GSS coaches will regularly give families feedback relative to students' progress in terms of CE skills. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 8  · Teachers will be paid to lead after school activities and trainings · 80 minutes of bi-weekly PD time will be used to support this activity · All students are programmed for Group during 1st period Monday, Wednesday and Fridays. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Students CE progress will be tracked through class specific tracking systems as well as through the grading of the CE outcome, which is recorded in the JumpRope on-line grading system. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. CE outcome in JumpRope on-line grading system. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: As part of the DOE Learning Partners Program, we learned how to use Japanese Lesson Study to introduce and evaluate instructional approaches. The lesson study approach helps teachers feel comfortable experimenting with new ideas and opening up their classrooms to other teachers. Meetings are facilitated by a teacher leader who meets weekly with the principal to review work and prepare an agenda for each upcoming meeting. The focus of these teacher- principal meetings is also to provide the lead teachers with feedback and support in order to develop their facilitation skills. Needs: While teachers use the Lesson Study time productively to generally move instruction relative to defined goals, teachers have noted that they still struggle to differentiate instruction within the classroom for students who are either extremely low or high skilled. This has become more of a challenge since we have started serving both a population of overage students promoted from middle school and transfer students who have already been to high school. This need is reflected in the relatively low scores for Danielson Domains 1e and 3c (2.72 and 2.75 respectively) which note the continued struggled with designing and implementing instruction that meets the needs of all students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be growth in teacher lesson planning to better support all students as measured by a 10% increase in evaluation scores in Danielson domains 1e and 3c. The rates for 2017-18 in these domains was 2.72 and 2.75 respectively. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  All SpEd teachers will meet three times per month during Thursday department meeting to focus on learning ICT models and strategies that they can implement in their partner work in the classroom. Full staff professional development sessions will be held to ensure that all staff members, including those who are not in the SpEd department are familiar with ICT models and strategies. IEP reviews will focus on the Management Needs section of the IEP in order to identify the specialized supports students need and how those supports can be provided to students in the classroom. SpEd Teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 AP of SpEd and SpEd Dept Facilitator (Teacher) All teachers September 2018 to June 2019 BFHS Principal, AP of SpEd and SpEd Dept Facilitator (Teacher) School Implementation Team September 2018 to June 2019 AP of SpEd We will use our refined after-school “Team Talk” time to discuss the specialized needs and supports of individual students as identified by staff. All staff members September 2018 to June 2019 Student Support Teams (Teachers and Good Shepherd Services partners) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. IEP meetings will highlight the management needs section of the IEP and annual review and triennial meetings will highlight how students are being provided the supports in their classes. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Department meeting time will be used for Lesson Study. LPP team members will be compensated for meeting during their prep periods to work with the principal to plan sessions. Prep period coverages will be provided to teachers who substitute for other teachers who are visiting LPP partner schools. After school PD time will be used to refine DOE/ GSS communication structures and strategies. Per session and C6 time will be used for academic advisement training/ implementation. 1  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In January 2018, at least 50% of teachers will rate their professional development experience as positively impacting their ability to develop student to student collaboration skills. This will be measured by an in-house survey that is periodically administered throughout the school year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. In-house survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: As part of the NYC DOE Learning Partners Program, our school focused on further developing our teacher teams. Weekly planning sessions with the principal and the teacher- leaders who facilitate the department meetings are focused on reviewing the past week’s work, opportunities and/ or concerns and developing a plan for the upcoming week. The principal is therefore aware of all team work occurring in departments and is able to provide specific feedback relative to instructional implementation when conducting classroom observations. The principal and teacher leaders ensure problem solve collaboratively. Teacher leaders meet regularly to discuss the work in their departments and problems they are facing. The meetings are facilitated by the principal with the goal of helping teachers learn to more effectively serve as resources for one another. Needs: Teachers have been working collaboratively to improve various aspects of their instruction relative to skills identified by the Danielson rubric. The end of the year survey noted progress in terms of student to student support and improved classroom atmosphere. However, teachers feel that we need to continue to develop in this area in order to deepen student thinking/depth of cognitive engagement. This need is further evidenced in the 2017-18 QR data for Indicator 1.2 which named as our focus area and was rated as "Proficient." Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the average teacher rating on in-house survey of the impact of CE on instruction will increase by 10% in scores associated with depth of student thinking/cognitive engagement relative to June 2018 scores. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). At the start of the school year, the AP and Principal will establish CE as measured in Domains 3b and 3c as a focus for the year for all teachers and connect this to the the schoolwide focus of developing student to student collaboration. The principal and AP will meet at the beginning of each week to plan which observations each will conduct. At the end of each week, all administrators will again meet to share their observations. This will not only lead to more regular observations, but also to better quality feedback since all potential observers will be informed of recent observations and important next steps for each teacher. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers Sept 2018 Principal, AP All teachers Principal, AP September 2018 to June 2019. Teacher observations reports and feedback will capture CE next steps and goals relative to key Danielson domains, especially domains 3b and 3c. Specific feedback will be given in subsequent observations to note progress towards achieving defined next steps. Teachers will be asked to reflect on their progress. Principal AP Principal, AP September 2018 to June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The principal will work collaboratively with the SLT to ensure that parent input is incorporated into school decisions. This will happen at the monthly meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Teacher prep periods will be utilized for 1:1 meetings in order to provide teachers with feedback  Google docs tracker will be modified to track progress towards goals. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 4  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Observation data from Advance will be monitored to highlight CE growth in the domains 3b and/or 3c. We will review this data regularly and expect that by February of 2019, 40% of teachers will have made progress relative to their observation data in domains 3b and/or 3c at the same time in 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance/ google doc tracker Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths · Students’ Good Shepherd Services coaches serve as points of contact for parents. Coaches engage parents daily for attendance outreach and to discuss concerns or celebrate achievements. Parents form relationships with their students’ coach through daily attendance outreach calls and regular phone check-ins that are initiated by the coach. Parents are always able to contact their student’s coach if they have any questions about their student’s progress. Our parent coordinator encourages PTA participation by regularly communicating with parents via their preferred modality (email, phone or text). Additionally, in order to accommodate parents with physical disabilities who otherwise would not be able to participate in the PTA, this year, meetings have been moved to an off-site, wheelchair accessible location. We have created opportunities for video conferencing when parents have not been able to attend Parent-Teacher conferences. · We continue to add regular events that are designed to encourage parents to come to the school and be an active part of the community. These include: Youth Development Potluck, Celebration of Cultures, and Bingo Night. Needs On-going communication with families is an important asset for improving student outcomes. As such, it is important for us to increase the connections to families and ensure that they have ongoing contain with the school regarding their students' progress. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 10% increase in the rate of documented outreach to parents per student from the 2017-18 rate. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Academic Advisers and GSS coaches will attend a training day to assist them in develop structures for collaborating to support their caseloads. Academic Advisers and GSS Coaches August 29, 2018 Principal, Director, Academic Advisers and GSS Coaches Additional workshops will be developed alongside the PTA in order to create trusting relationships and develop parents’ understanding of academic expectations and associated supports. These will include ongoing opportunities to education families on both the Youth Development practices and how they are implemented at BFHS as well as outcomes based grading and instruction and graduation requirements. All parents/ guardians September 2018- June 2019 Regular meetings will be held throughout each cycle to evaluate student progress data and plan interventions, including scheduling parent meetings. All students September 2018- June 2019 Regular weekly meetings will be held throughout the school year to track attendance and plan interventions, including scheduling parent meetings. These will be tracked via google docs. All students September 2018- June 2019 The parent coordinator would work collaboratively with DOE and GSS staff members in order to coordinate parent workshops Academic Advisers and coach teams will meet regularly to assess and plan for each individual student's needs Academic Advisers and coach teams will meet regularly to assess and plan for each individual student's needs. Outreach calls will be reviewed monthly to monitor trends and make corrections to increase parent engagement in academics. All parents/ guardians September 2018- June 2019 School Administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Good Shepherd Services Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 7  Title I family engagement funds will be used to provide parents with refreshments for both planning meetings and actual workshops. Tax Levy funding will be used to license JumpRope. The data tracker utilizes google docs and does not have any associated costs. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP X Title I TA 21st Century Grant SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018, the average rate of outreach to parents will be at least 13 instances per student. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent outreach and meetings are currently tracked via Kinvo and ETO. We will use this data to determine progress towards our goal. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Really Great Reading- small group during the school day small group student lunch/ after school structured whole class and small group structured whole class and small group group and one-on-one during the school day during the school day during the school day, after school Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) All incoming 9th graders are administered a diagnostic reading inventory and running records All incoming 9th graders are administered diagnostic math inventory multisensory instruction in decoding Math outcomes recovery Science Low Regents scores Regents Prep Social Studies Low Regents scores Regents Prep At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) All students participate in school based group and individual coaching sessions participate in school based group and individual coaching sessions Mandated counseling Students with mandated counseling indicated on their IEP 9  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 10 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students in temporary housing will receive academic supports beyond the school day. Students receive basic supplies that they to come to school prepared for learning. This includes schools supplies as well as any additional clothing or other items needed for personal hygiene. We will work collaboratively with the Simba program to ensure that students receive after-school tutoring that allows them to focus both on homework completion as well as skill development. We will continue our work with the Simba program to provide students with opportunities for skill and career development on the the weekends. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). We are a Title I school 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 0  We are a Title I school 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. We are a Title I school 1  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● The hiring process begins early in the school year (March) and consists of several rounds of interviews to ensure that we have access to the most qualified candidates for each position. ● Hire teachers to provide in-house support to all teachers in implementing blended learning initiatives and literacy development programs across subject areas. Teachers will work with both students and staff directly to understand need and support PD for other staff members. ● Use per session to fund teachers to meet in teams to assess student results and develop instructional programs to match identified needs ● Utilize Title I funding to reimburse teachers for educational expenses associated with advance degree programs and attainment of HQT status. ● Beyond the regular school professional development program, teachers are encouraged to attend workshops offered by the BFC to further develop their skills and maintain an interest in continued growth. ● Develop relationships with organizations such as Math for America, Peace Corp Fellows, and Teaching Fellows to recruit candidates that are highly qualified and interested in working with an academically challenged student population ● New teachers are paired with experienced teacher mentors who can support them both to develop their pedagogical skills and to support them when they experience challenges  Teachers are provided choices in their assignments and opportunities for leadership and decision making in order to best leverage their strengths and help them feel satisfied in their roles 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). 2  ● Meeting times are structured in order to give provide more continued focus opportunities. The 55 minute department meetings will be held on Tuesdays and Thursdays. The 80 weekly minutes of afterschool professional development time will be moved to Tuesdays. Departments select their Thursday activities. For two Tuesdays a month, the professional development time will be added to the department meeting time, thereby creating a 135 minute block for teachers to meet. We anticipate that on these two Tuesdays per month, departments will embark on Lesson Studies to jointly develop and evaluate new instructional approaches. All departments will participate in a minimum of three rounds of Lesson Study throughout the year. ● For the other two Tuesdays every month, departments will engage in work that supports the Lesson Study, including reading scholarly articles and learning about pedagogical approaches from outside experts. Topics will be decided with the guidance of the PD committee. The 80 minute professional develop time for these weeks will focus on joint Good Shepherd Services/ DOE sessions to continue to develop engagement communication strategies. Paraprofessionals meet regularly with the AP of SpEd and the School Psychologist to develop their ability to support their students and address any obstacles that they encounter. The principal and assistant principals attend monthly professional development offered by the District Superintendent. They also participate in monthly professional learning with other administrators as part of the the Learning Partners Program. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) 3  Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Not applicable 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Brooklyn Frontiers High School utilizes a school-wide competency/ outcomes-based instructional and assessment approach. Teachers work in their departments to agree on the “outcomes” or level of skills that students must demonstrate in order to receive credit for a course. While teachers may create their own assessments, teachers frequently co-create or share assessments so that they are uniform across teachers. Teachers meet weekly in their departments. These meetings are facilitated by teachers and structured to encourage teacher voice and decision-making. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Sections 5, 6, 7, 8 NA NA NA Section 5 Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 132,808 0 0 0 2,696,803 X NA NA NA X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools 4  may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. 5   IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 6  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Brooklyn Frontiers High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Brooklyn Frontiers High School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 7  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 8  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Brooklyn Frontiers High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 9  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 0  ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; 1  ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 15 School Name Brooklyn Frontiers High School Borough Brooklyn School Number 423 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Alona Cohen Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Mariah Roeseler Teacher/Subject Area Lauren Rugg/Biology Teacher/Subject Area N/A Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Paul Rotondo Assistant Principal Maria Sandoval Coach N/A School Counselor N/A Parent Nicole Grant Parent Coordinator Michael Haimes Field Support Center Staff Member O’Mayra Cruz Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 164 3 Total number of ELLs 10 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 6.10%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school uses multiple assessment tools to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs. All incoming students complete a one-on-one reading assessment that consists of an oral reading fluency assessment and Really Great Reading's Diagnostic Decoding Surveys. The data from assessing the literacy skills of our ELLs shows us that some of our ELLs have moderate to significant decoding deficits. These students are placed in a reading intervention class (Linguistics). Our ELLs who are strong decoders but require support in reading comprehension and developing fluency skills are programmed for an advanced reading class (Power Reading). Assessing all incoming 9th grade students and tracking the progress of students programmed for reading intervention courses provides us with valuable data that we use to determine whether further interventions are needed. This data informs our instructional plan because we offer students a personalized educational experience. Student programs are designed to challenge each learner, but at the same time provide them with all necessary supports to achieve academic success and are geared to meet students where they are academically. 4  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Once students are admitted to our school they come in for registration and orientation. At that time students are given the individualized reading assessment by one of the ENL teachers. If it is determined that the student requires more intensive reading supports the student is programmed for a reading intervention course. In addition, the student is provided the opportunity to participate in an early morning reading club that provides him/her with the opportunity to meet with a teacher and read books at the students appropriate reading level in a safe, low stakes setting. Results of the intake reading assessments are shared with the students' teachers so that they are aware of the students levels and can group their classes appropriately. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Teachers provide unit assessments throughout the trimester in all classes. In addition, students in reading interventions classes are assessed throughout the trimester to determine if they require further intervention classes. We evaluate the success of our program for ELLs by assessing credit accumulation and Regents pass rates . 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? There is ongoing monitoring of progress by teachers across all subject areas. In addition staff meet three times a year to review credit accumulation and regents data. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A (We are a 9-12 school). 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Patterns across our two previous years indicate that our ELLs generally score higher on the Listening and speaking portions (often scoring at Expanding/Commanding levels) of the NYSELAT than they do on the Reading/Writing portions (often scoring at Emerging/Transitioning levels). We also look at regents pass rates in ELA and Math to help us identify students who require extra support via Regents prep courses. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? In addition to ENL teachers meeting to review NYSELAT data at the beginning of the school year, the entire school staff meets three times a year (at the end of each trimester) to review the previous cycle's credit accumulation and applicable regents data. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. In our program model, students are placed in heterogeneous classes. Our classes are ungraded as each student's trajectory toward graduation is different. ENL is provided to students in two ways, integrated and standalone. Integrated ENL is offered in daily 55-minute classes taught by Lauren Rugg, one of our biology teachers. Ms. Rugg is currently enrolled in an ENL Certification program. Ms. Rugg uses an ENL approach to ensure that her ELL students are provided the necessary scaffolds to access her biology curriculum. Mariah Roeseler teaches 5  a standalone ENL course called Linguistics where the lowest level ELL students are enrolled. Linguistics is a reading intervention course that addresses specific decoding deficits. Students are taught to apply phonetic rules to decode words as well as gain a better understanding of the phonemic and phonological rules that help not only improve reading skills, but spelling as well. In addition, students requiring additional minutes of instruction are programmed for a standalone ENL course also taught by Ms. Roeseler. Ms. Roeseler's class functions as a traditional ESL class where she uses an ENL approach to develop students English language skills with a focus on listening, speaking, reading and writing. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The organization of our staff ensures that our ELLs receive the mandated number of minutes of instruction in ENL as ELLs receive an individualized course schedule depending on their level of ELL proficiency. Integrated ENL services are provided within Biology classes for 55 minutes 5 times a week (440 minutes a week). The literacy skills of each incoming student is assessed and if the students is found to have decoding deficits, they are programmed for a literacy intervention class taught by an ENL teacher for 55 minutes 3 times a week (165 minutes). In addition students are also programmed for a standalone ENL class taught by an ENL teacher for 38 minutes 5 times a week (190 minutes). Entering ELLs receive 540 minutes of instruction, 100 of those minutes are provided through direct, standalone instruction. Emerging ELLs receive 360 minutes of instruction, 90 of those minutes are provided trough direct, standalone instruction. Transitioning and Expanding students receive at least 180 minutes of instruction through a combination of Integrated ENL or standalone ENL services. Students or are at the commanding receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL support. We currently do not program students for HLA instructional minutes since the model we follow is a Freestanding ENL program. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Core content is delivered in Ms. Rugg’s biology class through the Sheltered English approach. Other instructional approaches include Push-In support, co-teaching, purposeful student grouping, written and oral instructions and multi-sensory teaching strategies. In Ms.Roeseler targeted literacy intervention, core content is delivered using a direct method. Additionally, regular feedback every 2-3 weeks to students and families along with weekly meetings with a student coach allow for individualized feedback to student and goal setting for academic progress. Books in ELLs' native languages are available in classroom libraries as well as bilingual dictionaries and glossaries for content area vocabulary. ELLs' performance is consistently monitored and assessed and instructional planning is continually adjusted based on the data from student work. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students are asked to identify their native language during the intake interview. School staff that is fluent in the native language is able to assess students' comprehension and communication skills in the native language. The translation unit is contacted if there is no one on staff fluent in the student's native language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 6  We differentiate instruction for each of the ELL subgroups in the following ways: a. In addition to the regular ENL instructional time, SIFE students will receive one on one and group counseling (once and week and twice a week, respectively). SIFE students will also receive co-teaching services and additional tutoring sessions after school. b. In addition to the regular ENL instructional time, newcomer ELLs will receive after-school tutoring specifically designed to address literacy skills in English. c. In addition to the regular ENL instructional time, Developing ELLs students will also receive after school tutoring (Outcomes Recovery) to work on comprehension and test taking strategies. d. In addition to the regular ENL instructional time, Long term ELLs will receive targeted literacy supports and tutoring in comprehension and test taking strategies. e. Former ELLs will receive transitional ENL services for up to two years. These services include individual and small group tutoring, literacy intervention classes, English classes with two teachers in the room, and other accommodations that the former ELLs teachers deem necessary. For up to two years, former ELLs receive testing accommodations as necessary to support their instruction and learning, including testing in a separate location, extended time on tests (i.e. "time and a half"-- the required testing time plus half that amount), a third reading of the Listening Section of the English Language Arts Regents exam, bilingual dictionaries and glossaries and simultaneous use of English and Alternative Language Editions of state tests for which the state provides translated copies and oral translation for lower-incidence languages and writing responses in the native language for state tests. Testing accommodation decisions are made in collaboration with former ELLs' teacher and the school administration in accordance with the best judgment of the ELLs' needs. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELL-SWDs use Universal Design Principles (UDP) when designing and delivering instruction in order to provide access to academic content areas an accelerate English language development. This includes providing both written and spoken versions of texts, having online translation tools and dictionaries available, and using subtitled videos. Teachers adapt texts; use embedded questions, writing frames, graphic organizers, model texts, and explicit and timely feedback. Teachers also collaborate across departments to align writing instruction and feedback. Teachers use word walls and explicitly teach content area vocabulary. Additionally, both ELLs and native English speakers are assessed and, if deemed eligible, programmed into literacy intervention classes that focus on phonics, decoding of text, and improving accuracy and fluency in reading in English. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? All ELL-SWDs are programmed into ICT ELA, Math, and Elective classes. This ensures that students who need additional support are provided with both an appropriate pace for instruction as well as materials that are accessible at the equivalent grade level at which they are reading. The criteria used to place ELL-SWDs in ICT classes include a review of the students IEPs. Additionally, all students are assessed and, if deemed eligible, programmed into targeted literacy intervention classes. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted interventions for our ELLs exist in all subject areas. For ELA, ELLs who have extensive decoding deficits are placed in a literacy intervention class, Linguistics, which meets three times a week for 55 minutes. Linguistics focuses on spelling, vocabulary acquisition, accuracy, and fluency in reading and is taught in English by ENL teachers. Power Reading is another reading intervention class that meets three times a week for 55 minutes. Power Reading targets students who can already read simple texts out loud with pretty good fluency, but are struggling in school due to their limited literacy skills. Students are taught reading strategies that help them tackle challenging texts such as those on Regents exams or in college classes. Students are also able to participate in an early morning reading club that provides them the opportunity to meet with a teacher and read books at the students appropriate reading level in a safe, low stakes setting. Math intervention services are provided during lunch and/or after school tutoring sessions. All students including ELLs are also offered lunch and/or after-school academic support in the form of 1:1 and small group tutoring with content area teachers everyday. Targeted 7  interventions for students in social studies and science are offered daily during lunch or after school by appointment in a 1:1 student/teacher setting as well as during the last day of every cycle (three times a year). In addition, Regents Prep courses are offered for all subject areas that end in a Regents examination. Interventions in the students’ native language are not currently provided, but bilingual staff members are available to support students as needed. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the coming school year, we will ensure that content departments select ELL student work when they collectively examine student work. In our school-wide inquiry work, one of our Long Term ELLs will be observed by a range of teachers using low inference observation tools in order to assess teacher practices that could be implemented to help increase student independence and to strengthen student academic performance. In addition we will begin a Culture Club where students and staff members of various cultural backgrounds will meet during student lunch and discuss ways in which cultural diversity can be celebrated throughout the school community. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We do not have plans to discontinue any of our current programs or services for ELLs. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs such as clubs (Double Dutch, Gay Straight Alliance, Women's Group), 1:1 and small group tutoring, field trips around New York City (Chinatown, Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 826 nyc, Chinese Scholar's Garden in Staten Island), local and regional college campuses, and activities. After school, our students, including ELLs, are offered academic tutoring. The Student Leadership group provides additional student-led activities in the afternoons and on weekends, for example the Hispanic Heritage Celebration, Thanksgiving Multicultural Celebration, and our end of the year Student Celebration. All of our students, including ELLs, are eligible to participate in Learning to Work paid internships. Supplemental services such as translation, extra tutoring, and access to educational information for families are offered on a case-by-case basis. ELLs are invited to participate in these opportunities by their GSS coach and/or teachers. Many ELL students take advantage of provided enrichment opportunities. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. ELL students are provided with Instructional materials that include classroom projectors and SMART Boards, multi-sensory materials, and MacBook or Google Chromebook computers. Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding and Commanding students have access to the same instructional materials. Students are taught how to access online translation tools such as Google translate and are provided with bilingual dictionaries/glossaries when requested. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? When possible, ELLs are assigned to a coach who speaks their native language and who provides academic and social counseling in both English and the student's native language. In the classroom, online tools such as Google translate, are used. Students have access to instructional videos in their native language with English subtitles and in English with native language subtitles through Discovery Education. Native language glossaries and dictionaries are also available. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Required services, support and resources correspond to ELLs’ age and grade level, as the focus of our school is to provide age appropriate access to our students who have fallen two years behind in their academic progress. Classroom libraries are leveled and designed to provide high interest materials for high school students that require low reading level skills. Scaffolds, outlines, and adapted texts with embedded questions are used to ensure that ELL-SWDs are provided the necessary supports appropriate for their cognitive needs. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Brooklyn Frontiers High School does not share a building with any other school. 8  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Students and families meet with a staff member for an intake appointment. At that time, student and family needs are assessed and resources aligned to support students. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We currently offer French, Spanish, and American Sign Language as a foreign language elective. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? We do not have a DL program at our school. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school is based on the existing school-wide professional development model. As a school, we use outcomes to assess student learning, outcome- based assessments, teachers work to deliver timely and useful feedback on student performance to students, families, and academic coaches. Additionally, the ENL teacher works with teachers to refine their course outcomes to include language objectives that ELLs will need to be taught in order to access the information. Within departmental team meetings, the ENL teachers work with content area teachers to examine and refine outcomes-based assignments to reflect second language learning needs. The ENL teacher is engaged in professional development for the Really Great Reading Phonics Blitz program used in the reading intervention course offered to students with significant decoding deficits. School wide professional Development is provided through a Lesson Study approach. Meeting times are structured in order to provide more continued focus opportunities. The 55-minute department meetings will be held on Tuesdays and Thursdays. The 80 weekly minutes of after school professional development time is held on Tuesdays after school. Departments select their Thursday activities. For two Tuesdays a month, the professional development time is added to the department meeting time, thereby creating a 135 minute block for teachers to meet. During tow Tuesdays per month, departments embark on Lesson Studies to jointly develop and evaluate new instructional approaches. All departments will participate in a minimum of three rounds of Lesson Study throughout the year. For the other two Tuesdays every month, departments will engage in work that supports the Lesson Study, including reading scholarly articles and learning about pedagogical approaches from outside experts. Topics will be decided with the guidance of the PD committee. The 80-minute professional development time for these weeks will focus on joint Good Shepherd Services/ DOE sessions to continue to develop engagement communication strategies. To support ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards, Maria Sandoval, AP of SpEd and ESL will work with content area teachers to help ensure that course outcomes, assignments, and teacher feedback includes approaches to facilitate second language acquisition. After School Professional Learning (2:50- 4:00)- library 3 Staff Meetings 3 Data Review Sessions 9 Full Staff PD Sessions 9  4 Full PD Days 17 Lesson Study/ Group Supervision Sessions 9/5- Full Staff PD- no students 9/6- Full Staff PD- no students 9/12- Staff Meeting- review first few days 9/19- Lesson Study (DOE)/ Group Supervision (GSS) 9/26- Full Staff PD- Mission Development 10/3- Lesson Study (DOE)/ Group Supervision (GSS) 10/10- Full Staff PD- Revised Mission Statement Feedback 10/17- Lesson Study (DOE)/ Group Supervision (GSS) 10/24- Full Staff PD- 10/31- Lesson Study (DOE)/ Group Supervision (GSS) 11/7- (Election Day)- Full Staff PD/ Meeting (Community Engagement Rubric/ Outcome revisit) 11/14- Lesson Study (DOE)/ Group Supervision (GSS) 11/21- Staff Meeting- Thanksgiving Planning 11/28- No Meetings- End of Cycle Prep 12/5- Conflicts of Interest Training (DOE)/ Group Supervision (GSS) 12/12- Lesson Study (DOE)/ Group Supervision (GSS) 12/19- Full Staff PD 1/2- Cycle 1 Data Review 1/9- Lesson Study (DOE)/ Group Supervision (GSS) 1/16- Full Staff PD 1/29- Chancellor’s Conference Day PD (Community Engagement Rubric/ Outcome revisit) 1/30- Lesson Study (DOE)/ Group Supervision (GSS) 2/6- Jan Regent Data Review 2/13- Lesson Study (DOE)/ Group Supervision (GSS) 2/27- Full Staff PD 3/6- Lesson Study (DOE)/ Group Supervision (GSS) 3/13- No Meetings- End of Cycle Prep 3/20- Full Staff PD 3/27- Lesson Study (DOE)/ Group Supervision (GSS) 4/10- Lesson Study (DOE)/ Group Supervision (GSS) 4/17- Cycle 2 Data Review 4/24- Lesson Study (DOE)/ Group Supervision (GSS) 5/1- Full Staff PD 5/8- Lesson Study (DOE)/ Group Supervision (GSS) 5/15- Staff Meeting- Regents Planning 5/22- Lesson Study (DOE)/ Group Supervision (GSS) 5/29- Full Staff PD 6/5- Lesson Study (DOE)/ Group Supervision (GSS) 6/22- Full Staff PD- no students in attendance 8/27/18- Full Staff PD (prep for 2018-19 school year) 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Professional development for all teachers will follow a Lesson Study approach, taking the following steps: Identify year-long departmental goal aligned with school-wide objective 0  Determine current student skills that need to be developed Research and read professional literature related to skills Collaboratively develop a study lesson focused on teaching a specific skill All members of each department observe the study lesson Debrief the study lesson- determine what worked and what needs to be further developed. The school wide objective for lesson study is that each department will develop pedagogical moves that enable them to support students’ collaboration and communication skills within the context of their subject area. Estimated schedule: September- Each department finalizes year long goal. October- Begin first round of lesson study October to June- Each department will complete 3-5 rounds of Lesson Study ELL-specific professional development for ENL teachers will be conducted by Maria Sandoval, AP of SpEd and ESL. Topics will include: ESL strategies, methodologies and second language acquisition, instructional scaffolding techniques, developing differentiated instruction strategies for English Language Learners, Understanding by Design as well as administration and interpretation of the NYSESLAT to assist teachers in using appropriate strategies to address the learning needs and styles of ELLs. In addition, teachers use 2 55-minute common preparation periods per month as a forum to share best practices and to support individual teacher growth as well as to build community. Records of teachers' participation in these trainings are kept as sign-in sheets from the meetings. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Families attend an Orientation/Enrollment meeting during student intake. At this time a general overview of the goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results and language needs of ELL students are discussed. In addition Maria Sandoval, Assistant Principal of SpEd and ESL contacts all parents of ELL students and reviews the student's individual proficiency assessment results which include NYSESLAT levels (if available). Ms. Sandoval then informs the parents of how their student is receiving ENL services at Brooklyn Frontiers. The individual student's language development progress and language development needs are discussed in relation to each class he/she is programmed for and the parent is provided an opportunity to ask clarifying questions. Translation services are available from DOE/GSS staff members or the DOE's Language Translation Unit. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parental involvement at our school, including parents of ELLs, begins in the initial stages of registration. Parents attend the initial intake meeting with students and families learn together about our school’s model of supporting students. Families decide to enroll based on their interest in the academic and social supports offered by both students’ academic coaches and content area teachers. After enrollment, parents are included in Family Orientation, Parent Teacher Conferences, IEP meetings, monthly Parent Teacher Association meetings, Outcomes Workshops, Youth Development Workshops, potluck dinners, dinner sales, and through the Parent Teacher Association. The parent coordinator organizes family orientation events and supports the PTA in organizing meetings and workshops. The school’s bilingual staff and the Department of Education’s translation unit provide translation and interpretation services as needed. Below is the schedule of dates for parent workshops. While all dates are firm, many workshop topics have yet to be determined since parent interest drives topic selection. 1  9/28/17 (PTC Night- Thurs)- SLT at 4:00 PM 10/18/17- Workshop on Outcomes (Parker) 11/15/17- Graduation Requirements Workshop (Alona or designee) and Thanksgiving Potluck 12/13/17 1/17/18 2/14/18 3/21/18 4/18/18 5/16/18 6/6/18 Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. As our school design is formulated around working with students who have been enrolled in New York City schools but have fallen behind their peers, our ELLs have already experienced academic failure when they enroll at our school. As the majority of our ELLs have been receiving services for more than 6 years by the time they enter high school and have been performing higher on their Speaking and Listening portions of the NYSESLAT, through all of our work with our students, ELLs included, we work to assess their current literacy needs, determine the best educational practices for helping them achieve grade level literacy skills and meet Common Core Learning Standards and to help our students re-engage with school in a positive way. We see our role as ENL teachers and content area teachers for our ELLs as needing to determine the intersection of our students’ second language learning needs, academic content learning needs and factors aside from language learning that impact their performance in school. Our model is a collaboration with Community Based Organization, Good Shepard Services, which provides counselors for our students, our College Access Counselor, our Learning to Work Coordinator and other supports to help us support our students toward their graduation from high school. In order to support staff to assist ELLs as they transition from middle to high school, staff members work with students' coaches to identify and respond to transition-related needs. Additionally, the application process to enter our school entails a thorough interview process for both the student and their family during which areas needing potential support are identified. This allows the students' coaches to both support them at the school level in peer, group, academic, and teacher interactions as well as working with them and their families to access outside services when necessary. Our College Access Coordinator works with all students, including ELLs, to familiarize them with and to help facilitate the college application process and post secondary opportunities. All staff members involved in the transition of our students participate in a variety of both in-house and outside professional development. 2 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Maria Sandoval, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 3  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Brooklyn Frontiers High School School DBN: 15K423 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Alona Cohen Title Principal Maria Sandoval Assistant Principal Michael Haimes Parent Coordinator Maria Sandoval ENL/Bilingual Teacher Nicole Grant Lauren Rugg Parent Teacher/Subject Area Mariah Roeseler Teacher/Subject Area NA NA NA Paul Rotondo O'Mayra Cruz Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member ELL Compliance Neil Pergament Other Assistant Principal Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/5/17 9/5/17 9/5/17 9/5/17 9/16/15 9/5/17 9/5/17 9/5/17 9/5/17 9/5/17 9/5/17 9/5/17 9/5/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 4  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 15K423 School Name: Brooklyn Frontiers Superintendent: Paul Rotondo The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Maria Sandoval Assistant Principal Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. When students enroll in our school, parents' home language and preferred language for written and oral communication is assessed through the initial interview. Once the student is admitted to our school, the ELL Coordinator reviews his/her academic history. If it is determined that the student has not attended a NYC public school in the last two years, the ELL Identification Process is administered. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 5  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Twi Haitian Creole Fulani Arabic 165 21 2 1 1 1 86.39 10.99 1.05 0.52 0.52 0.52 165 21 2 1 1 1 86.39 10.99 1.05 0.52 0.52 0.52 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Benchmark Reports monthly Parent Letters as needed Notice of IEP mtgs as needed Recruitment flyers as needed Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Many templates for the notices listed are available in several languages on the DOE's Translation and Interpretation intranet site and are printed on an as needed basis. Bilingual staff members translate any documents not available. Documents needed to be translated to a language not spoken by BFHS staff will be submitted to the DOE's translation unit at least two weeks ahead of when needed. Bilingual staff members translate documents into Spanish, French or Haitian Creole as needed. Documents needed in any other language will be submitted to the DOE's translation unit. SESIS automatically generates notices in the parent's preferred language. Bilingual staff members translate documents into Spanish, French or 6  Haitian Creole as needed. Documents needed in any other language will be submitted to the DOE's translation unit. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Formal face-to-face meetings with parents include parent-teacher conferences 9/28/17 10/26/17 2/8/18 5/17/18 PTA/ SLT meetings 2nd Wednesday of every month IEP and all other parent meetings as needed interpretation service(s)? Bilingual staff members are available to provide interpretation services for parent's whose preferred language is Spanish, French or Haitian Creole. Over the phone interpretation services are used with families whose language is not spoken by staff members. Bilingual staff members are available to provide interpretation services for parent's whose preferred language is Spanish, French or Haitian Creole. Over the phone interpretation services are used with families whose language is not spoken by staff members. Bilingual staff members are available to provide interpretation services for parent's whose preferred language is Spanish, French or Haitian Creole. Over the phone interpretation services are used with families whose language is not spoken by staff members. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Our school’s safety plan contains procedures for ensuring that parents in need of language access services are not prevented from reaching the school’s administrative offices solely due to language barriers. Our office staff, which answer the phones and greet families in the main office, either interpret themselves (French and Spanish) or match families with interpreters from our DOE or Good Shepherd staff. Wherever possible students are matched with a coach (counselor) who speaks the parent's preferred language. This is the student's primary person who contacts the parent in case of an emergency. In addition families have been provided with instructions on registering for Notify NYC alerts. Finally we use KiNVO an app that enables school staff to engage families through real-time, translated, text messaging. 7  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Chancellor's Regulation A-663 will be reviewed with staff members during the first Chancellor's Conference Day of every school year. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The LAC will ensure that the above listed notification requirements are posted and/or distributed to all pertinent stakeholders. In order to fulfill Section VII of Chancellor’s Regulations A-663 regarding parental notification requirements for translation and interpretation services, we provide each parent whose primary language is a covered language and who require language assistance services with a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services. We locate these translated versions of this document, in the covered languages, on the New York City Department of Education’s website. In a clear location near the primary entrance to our school, we post a sign in each of the covered languages, indicating the availability of interpretation services. We use the Interpretation Services Available signs as posted on the New York City Department of Education’s website. We do not currently have a school population with parents of more than 10% of the children at our school who speak a primary language that is neither English nor a covered language. In the case that our school population’s language needs shift so that we have a group of parents whose language needs are not covered by our staff, we will obtain translation from the Translation and Interpretation Unit, post signage and create forms in order to facilitate communication for the families of all of our students. We will use the information posted by the New York City Department of Education’s website as a guide to obtaining information in each of the covered languages concerning the rights of parents to translation and interpretation services and how to access such services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The mechanisms used to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services include, but are not limited to NYC School Surveys results and conversations with families. We've developed systems that include, but are not limited to, assigning students to counselors (coaches) that speak the parent's language wherever possible, sharing with parents information on the DOE Translation phone line, providing translated copies of notices sent home. 8 
