 23K446 School Name: RIVERDALE AVENUE COMMUNITY SCHOOL Principal: MEGHAN DUNN   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Riverdale Avenue Community School PS 446 332300010446 3K – 5 th School Number (DBN): 23K446 76 Riverdale Avenue, Brooklyn, NY, 11212 718-485-1679 Phone Number: 718-485-1768 Fax: Meghan Dunn mdunn6@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Meghan Dunn Christine Connors Nickesha Thomas Marie Charles NatoyaReman N/A N/A Joi Britt District Information Geographical District: 23 Dr. MiatheresaPate Superintendent: 1665 St. Marks Place, Brooklyn, NY, 11233 Superintendent’s Office Address: mpate@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-240-3677 Phone Number: 718-385-3768 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Brooklyn North Bernadette Fitzgerald FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street Bfitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-3954 Phone Number: 718-935-3954 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Meghan Dunn La'ShantaeSherrier NickeshaThomas NatoyaReman Adaya Sanders Marie Charles Tanya Raymond *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable/ Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher   Name MeaghanFlannery Adriana Navarro Thariya Duviella-Reed Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? At PS 446 the Riverdale Avenue Community School we believe that Resilience + Awareness + Collaboration = Success! As a neighborhood school, we see all of these components as being intrinsic parts of the neighborhood community itself. We are resilient when facing challenges that may arise, no matter how large or small. We are aware of ourselves and those around us, and seek to gain greater understanding and enlightenment whenever possible. Through our collaborative efforts, we come together to form a stronger unit and learn all that we can from each other. The combination of these efforts leads to success, both individually and as a community at large.   It is incumbent upon all of us to work together to ensure that the needs of students, parents, and staff are met. We are a focused learning community, where knowledge and self-improvement are our driving forces. We expect our students to constantly be learning, acquiring new skills, and encountering new experiences. Our staff works daily to ensure that these kinds of opportunities are being provided to students, and that they are seeking opportunities to enhance their own personal and professional lives. As their child’s first teacher, parents are our number one partner in this work. We will come together to work with parents to ensure that the needs of our students are being met, and to provide support to parents. Our primary commitment every day is to our students and their overall success. We define success and opportunity as the intersection of academic skill and extracurricular experience. Teachers and staff will work together to ensure that students are being given the kinds of learning opportunities that address individual strengths and areas of growth. Community partnerships will provide students with the kinds of broad experiences that will enable them to develop into unique individuals, with passions, abilities, and interests. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Riverdale Avenue Community School was opened in September 2012 and has been steadily growing ever since. This will be our second year at full capacity. Due to the many risk factors that our students face, our school currently partners with a community based organization called Partnership with Children (PWC). PWC provides additional social-emotional and counseling supports to students and their families. It supports crisis intervention as well as SEL (Social Emotional Learning) skill building across the school. The Riverdale Avenue Community School is organized around a looping model in which students stay with their teachers for multiple years. Teachers are then able to more fully understand their student’s academic and social emotional needs. All of our staff intentionally works to build relationships with families and to create a school environment where everyone feels welcome and cared for. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our school serves a high poverty population and directly provides for three individual temporary housing and shelter sites. We also have a high percentage of students receiving special education services, including school based program recommendations and related services. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our school feels particularly successful in the work we have done to develop a supportive environment for students, establish collaboration among teachers, and build strong family-community ties. Working in tandem with our CBO, we have been able to help support many students and families through times of crisis and develop supportive plans that connect homes to school. We have multiple opportunities for parents to partner with the school, offering workshops, support groups, and general family activities that help to promote supportive relationships between all stakeholders. This year, we are focusing our efforts on deepening the coordination of teams in the school, to ensure that every student has access to a quality education that addresses both the achievement gap and opportunity gap that affects our students. 0  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 23K446 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 347 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 38 37 19 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 19 19 3 2 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 95.0% % Attendance Rate 93.7% % Reduced Lunch 6.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.2% 21.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.25 0% 23% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 28.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 55% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 43 39 89.0% 0.9% 22.8% 73.8% 1.7% 1.4% 0 23% 4.2 10.2% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As noted in the Quality Review, and supported through Advance data, Measures of Student Learning (MOSL) data, teacher and parent surveys and analysis of student work products: Strengths: * Teachers from kindergarten to 5th grade use a CCLS aligned curriculum that builds upon students previous learning experiences to ensure a complete continuum of education * Teachers use EngageNY curricular resources to increase students’ exposure to real world, multi-level problem solving. * Partnership with Children social workers work with teachers to plan opportunities within the curriculum that support students in developing rigorous habits that include working collaboratively with their peers, expressing themselves verbally, planning, organizing and self-monitoring. * Writing emphasizes use of evidence from sources to inform or make an argument. * Instruction is customized to incorporate out of classroom experiences linked to building content knowledge, collaboration and communication skills, and academic skills and practices. *Building academic vocabulary and language across all subjects areas through the use of language stems has increased achievement in student writing and discussion. Needs: * Teacher teams inconsistently use unit plan templates and planning guides to support coherence on and across grade levels that addresses learning standards as well as the personal and academic behaviors associated with college and career readiness. * Scaffolds for struggling students need to be strategically implemented in unit and daily planning and instruction. 2  * A shift in pedagogical practice of decreasing largely guided modeling time, and increasing student discovery and ownership through collaborative groupings and independent tasks that will support the development of critical thinking skills and ambitious cognitive engagement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will improve the rigor of English Language Arts for all students, with a focus on Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners subgroups, through greater focus on targeted Tier II RTI interventions, as measured by a .25 years increase in average student growth on Teacher's College Running Records. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional development All teachers K - 5th August 2018 - June 2019 Principal Instructional Coaches TC Staff Developers All teachers K - 5th August 2018 - June 2019 Principal Instructional Coaches August 2018 - June 2019 Classroom teachers, paraprofessionals, Instructional Coaches, Principal Students with Individual Educational Plans (IEP), English Language Learners * Universal Design for Learning (UDL) provides teachers with a way to develop instruction which meets the diverse needs of all learners. A research-based framework, UDL suggests that each student learns in a unique manner so a one-size-fits-all approach is not effective. By creating options for how instruction is presented , how students express their ideas , and how teachers can engage students in their learning , instruction can be customized and adjusted to meet individual student needs. * Instructional rounds cycles of learning to improve and share best practices with targeted feedback sessions with the instructional coach and school leadership. Each teacher will participate in a one-on-one coaching and feedback session based on their RTI plans. Strategies to address the needs of high-need student groups * Guided small group instruction to support with prerequisite skills needed to complete task successfully * Cooperative grouping to use peers as resources * Provide task, checklist, prompts and model examples to support independence and focus * Targeted feedback aligned to rubric and models 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school hosts Meeting Math, an Open House, Parent Teacher Conferences, and Parent Walkthroughs as ways to support and engage families. One unique aspect of our schedule is that there are a group of teachers who stay an 4  extra 20 minutes everyday in the dismissal area. This gives parents a daily check in with staff and keeps lines of communication constantly open. Christina Yancey, our Parent Coordinator, is the key person responsible for these systems and events. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: * Use of Teacher Leadership funds to establish two Model Teacher roles to support grade team leaders Technology: * Increase of access to technology to support targeted learning and engagement (increase forum for sharing learning), parent resources (books, videos, manipulatives) Schedule Resources: * Per session to support planning sessions, increased per diem to cover teachers to meet with instructoinal coaches for feedback sessions, flexible scheduling to support all learners in increasing student achievement in the lest restrictive environment, reorganization of PD time to ensure that as many people as possible for planning across grades. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-point Checkpoint: By the end of our 2nd RTI cycle (approximately beginning of February 2019), at least 50% of Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners will have made progress towards their goal. Teachers will have data towards meeting these goals. Other Checkpoints: Instructional Coaches and the RTI Team will meet with the principal on a monthly basis to review RTI plans, monitor student progress. Each teacher will receive targeted feedback on their RTI plans. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Teachers College Running Records Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? This year we will sending our second graduating class to Middle School. Throughout the year, teachers and parents met about their concerns regarding support for students in their transition to middle school. As a looping school, we know a lot about our students and their individual needs. Self regulation and monitoring is a major part of preparing for this major change.. Students will need to transition to and from core subject classes independently and safely, without the guidance of a classroom teacher. Additionally, students will need to learn how to manage their time effectively during the movement in between classes to ensure their punctuality. Students will also need to learn how to maximize their time in order to complete tasks within a 60 minute instructional block and organize their materials accordingly. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of our fifth grade students will be properly informed, prepared and supported to transition to middle school. Each family will have an individual meeting about middle school choice, and all students will be provided with mini middle school experiences. This will include spending at least 7 periods a week in mixed, integrated classes, and participation in a monthly seminar. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students across the grade will be reconfigured into integrated classes for at least 7 periods a week, where students will be responsible for independently transitioning and self managing. 5th grade students and teachers Each family will have an individual meeting with a school staff member to plan for each student's individual transition plan. 5th grade students Use of coordinating council to develop monthly seminars for students based on teacher identified topics. 5th grade students Weekly from September 2018 to June 2019 Principal 5th Grade Classroom Teachers Cluster teachers Completion by December 2018 Instructional Coach 5th grade students and families Instructional Coach Monthly, September 2018 - June 2019 Principal Parent Coordinator 5th grade students and teachers Principal Parent Coordinator instructional Coach 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Fifth grade teachers along with the Parent Coordinator will be key personnel in the support of families, especially with this particular issue regarding middle school transition. Open lines of communication are crucial in making sure all people involved in the progression of elementary school to middle school are fully informed at all times. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 8  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: * Use of dedicated time from the school social worker to meet with families * Use of upper grade instructional coach to meet with families and help plan for monthly seminars Schedule Adjustment * All students in 5th grade will be mixed for a minimum of 7 periods in each in order to promote a slow transition into middle school. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By December 2018, all fifth grade students will receive progress reports that will include the social-emotional progress they have made, in addition to their academic levels. Students will be invited to attend Parent Teacher Conferences to reflect on and communicate their ability to transition according to their departmentalized schedule. By May 2017, 100% of fifth graders will complete a survey about their fifth grade experience. The data will then be used to support students for the remaining months of school. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student progress reports & surveys. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Supervision and observation of teachers is rooted in creating instructional coherency across classrooms. In this way all students benefit from strong instruction across grades and across classrooms. In order for this to occur, time spent working in collaboration and in targeted, teacher-specific professional development is a priority. Effective collaboration improves teacher performance but will also improve student performance. Increased effective collaboration exposes teachers to improved practices which leads to stronger pedagogy. A professional culture requires teachers who are willing to share, support, and explore together. Developing a collaborative culture will result in reducing poor teacher performance and improve student learning. In the 2016-2017 school year the school was divided into lower and upper elementary groups and an Instructional Coach was assigned to each band. This has allowed increased opportunities for teachers to have additional targeted support in 1:1 coaching styles and an opportunity for each coach to embed in a grade during a cycle supporting both the grade wide needs and specific teacher needs. As teachers become more and more proficient, there are many opportunities for teachers to learn from each other and provide support as colleagues, rather than through the traditional model of coach to teacher. We will continue to building on the supportive, collegial atmosphere by engaging teachers in an inter-visitation process. This protocol was tried out by a small group of teaches last year, and this year we are looking to fully embed the work across the school. This will result in increased relationships between teachers, teachers feeling more comfortable going to their colleagues for problem solving support and increased instructional content knowledge that will improve coherent instruction leading to cohesive teaching across the school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will participate in a minimum of two classroom inter-visitations, once as the visitor and once as the visitee, following the school’s inter-visitation protocol, resulting in a 5% decrease in the number of developing ratings on Domain 3 of the Danielson Framework for Teaching. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? In-house professional development structures: supported by the instructional coaches to ensure that all staff are familiar with the inter-visitation protocol. All Teachers August 2018 Principal - August 2019 Instructional Coaches Monthly staff events to build camaraderie and collegiality, so that all teachers feel comfortable accessing the wealth of knowledge that exists across the school. All teachers Classroom Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Model Teachers Principal Teacher Leaders Use of per diem release time to cover teachers for inter-visitations. All teachers October Principal 2018 - June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school currently hosts Parent Walkthroughs for parents to look at teaching and learning across the school; during these walkthroughs we will help to show parallels of how this work looks with teachers. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources * Use of Teacher Leadership funds to establish two Model Teachers to support grade teams leaders. 1  Budget * Use of per diem budget to support coverages for teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Leadership team will do a mid-year check in to assess the effectiveness of this practice, and to look at MOTP ratings. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Danielson Framework for Teaching Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. For the past two years, our school has been working on establishing teacher teams and dedicated teacher leadership across the school. Based on discussions and coaching sessions with teacher leaders in previous years, it has been observed that teacher leaders need more training and support in being effective in their leadership roles. This year, the school has adopted a school wide distributive leadership model, helping to ensure that there is a distribution of leadership across the school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all staff in teacher leadership roles will have attended summer leadership institute and receive monthly leadership coaching from the principal, to ensure effective and reflective leadership across the school. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Staff in leadership positions will participate in leadership training before school begins. Teacher leaders August 2018 Principal Development of Leadership Toolkit for all staff in leadership roles Monthly leadership coaching sessions with teacher leaders. Teacher Leaders Teacher Leaders Bi-Monthly Coordinating Council meetings to ensure that all teams are coordinating their efforts All staff Teacher Leaders Principal Teacher Leaders Principal Teacher Leaders Principal Teacher Leaders September 2018 - June 2019 Monthly, September 2018 - June 2019 Monthly, September 2018 - June 2019 Parent Coordinator CBO representative 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Events hosted by particular teams or groups can use that time to help engage and support families in their understanding of Effective School Leadership. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources * Use of Peer Collaborative and Model Teachers to create teacher leadership opportunities. 4  Schedule Adjustments * Use of Circular 6 professional time to support teacher leadership meeting time, Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Monthly check ins with all teacher team leaders and mid year evaluations of teacher leadership by the entire staff will serve as benchmarks to indicate progress. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Leadership Rubric Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Feedback from our QR and PPO have noted that parent groups feel strongly about the connection to the school, the sense of community, and inclusive environment that has been established. While many parents could articulate that they felt confident their child was safe, enjoyed school, and they were happy with the level of education their child was receiving and the ways in which they felt very much a part of the school community, parents had a challenging time articulating the specific academic goals for their child. This year, we are focusing on ensuring that parents understand the specific goals that the school has for their children and the ways that the school is supporting their growth and development. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, parents will participate and volunteer in a variety of school events that lead to greater understanding of their child’s academic progress, expectations for academic performance, and social-emotional growth, as measured by a 5% increase in parent attendance at events. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Use of September Open House to help introduce parents to the expectations of the school and build community. Parents Hold monthly PTA meetings, rotating between mornings and evenings each month, to include as many parents as possible in discussion and decision-making for the school community.. Parents September 2018 September 2018 - June 2019 Monthly Parent Math Nights to help increase the availability of Common Core aligned knowledge for all families. Parents Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Plan a series of workshops on topics connected to understanding the academic expectations of students in each grade level, to take place monthly starting in September 2016. Parents Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Parent Coordinator Parent Coordinator School Leadership Team Parent Coordinator Principal Coordinating Council Parent Coordinator Principal Coordinating Council 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Partnership With Children Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Parent Coordinator position funded by reaching the minimum student enrollment (200). - Principal, instructional coach and teachers to facilitate workshops on specific topics. - Meeting time with the PTA Executive Board to coordinate agendas for PTA meetings. - Use of parent engagement time on Tuesday afternoon to plan for monthly family topics. - Basic supplies to create materials for families to use at home to support their child’s learning. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 7  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019, a mid-year survey will be distributed to parents using questions from the "Strong Family and Community Ties" section of the school survey, and will reflect a 5% increase in positive responses. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Student Assessments including running records, let/sound correspondence, sight words, and concepts of print Student Assessments and Math Inventories Student assessment scores Student assessment scores Teacher and staff observations; parent requests Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) FUNdations; Leveled Literacy Intervention; Guided Reading; Reteaching Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group; one to one During the school day ECAM Centers; teacher created materials Teacher Created Materials Teacher Created Materials Counseling; therapeutic play groups Small group Small Group Small Group Small group or one on one During the school day During the school day During the school Ddy During the school day, after school 9  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 87 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Our Parent Coordinator reaches out to all STH families to schedule appointments to see what kinds of support they need. In addition, the CBO that the school partners with has a full time STH outreach worker dedicated to supporting families and reaching out to them. This outreach worker collaborates with community partners to create effective referrals for families seeking housing stability and seeking help for the host of issues that stem from housing instability. This worker also coordinates closely with all levels of school staff to create a careful and thorough level of consistent outreach to families that are dealing with housing crises. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 0  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 1  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Administration posts job descriptions at teacher training institutions, such as Teachers College, NYU, Hunter, and Brooklyn College; Administration attends job fairs being hosted by the DOE, area colleges, etc; use of the DOE website to interview teacher candidates identified as “highly qualified”; seeks out candidates with multiple licenses to support a diverse student body; providing ongoing professional development opportunities to teachers; offering option staff events to build camaraderie and collaboration amongst all staff members. The school partners with Teachers College to provide graduate level support to teachers for increasing their knowledge base. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Teachers all have beginning of year meetings and have identified goals aligned to the Danielson framework. These have been used to inform a comprehensive PD plan that includes a weekly PD for teachers to view and critique teaching/ instructional strategies aligned to various Danielson Domains. The Danielson PD will operate on an 8 week cycle and content will change according to teacher strengths and identified needs. Teachers have begun to receive informal observations which include actionable feedback aligned to 8 Danielson components. We also work with Teachers College and teachers are provided with the opportunity to attend professional development there. We have 20 staff development days throughout the year where teachers receive job embedded training and support. We are a part of Learning Partners this year, and teachers participate in a cycle of school visits. The school also works with the Math Collective to provide ongoing development and support in math instruction. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 2  N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Our school hosts a summer bridge program for students who are transitioning from pre-kindergarten to kindergarten. Parents have the opportunity to meet the teachers, see the classrooms, learn about curriculum, etc.. The teachers also work in the summer to do all of the beginning of the year kindergarten assessments before school starts, so that students are not pulled out of class in kindergarten and can begin to learn the routines of the school. The school also restructured its morning program so that kindergarten mirrors pre-kindergarten. Students are dropped off in the classroom by their parents each morning and eat breakfast in the classroom. Curriculum is aligned from pre-kindergarten to 5th grade - all of the grades use EngageNY for Math, and there is support from Teachers College for the literacy curriculum across the school. The school also has joint pre-kindergarten and kindergarten family involvement workshops including parent-child field trips and a parent child playgroup that meets. The pre-kindergarten teachers also meet regularly with the related service providers to plan out early intervention supports for students. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers have an opportunity to meet with the instructional team and voice their preferences when it comes to assessment choices in the school. The principal works in consultation with the instructional team to make these choices and to provide appropriate supports. This year the school will be using it's Model Teachers to build capacity among teachers in the area of assessment. All teachers are trained in August on the school wide assessments and ongoing support is provided during the year so that teachers can use their assessment information to inform instruction 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools 3  Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X X Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5b, 5e Section 5a, 5c, 5d Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 271,649.00 0 0 0 1,981,373.00 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent 4  and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 5  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Riverdale Avenue Community School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Riverdale Avenue Community School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 6  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 7  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Riverdale Avenue Community School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will 8  share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 9  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Parent Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 0  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 1  ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information Borough Brooklyn District 23 School Name Riverdale Avenue Community School School Number 446 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Meghan Dunn Coach Jacqueline Coley ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Yvelle Thornton Teacher/Subject Area Chrissy Connors / SPED Teacher/Subject Area Tamarra Brown/ CB Related-Service Provider Cassie LaBarbera, Speech Superintendent Dr. Miatheresa Pate Assistant Principal Renee Martin Coach Tawana Vasquez School Counselor Shoshana Diller Parent Annette Blackwood Parent Coordinator Christina Yancey Field Support Center Staff Member Camilla Holmes Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 3  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 299 Total number of ELLs 22 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 7.36% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? PS 446K uses two assessments to evaluate the early literacy skills of all of our students. 3X a year we administer the TCRWP running records, letter/sound and high frequency assessments. We also use the Reading Reform Foundation's phonograph analysis. These exams provide us with a baseline from which to measure student growth throughout the year. Data from these assessments allow us to develop flexible groups for students, to target specific skills and to plan our class periods where we work on specific language and reading skills. All of this information is inputted into the TC Assessment Pro so that we can manipulate the data to look at subgroups, measure growth, and monitor teaching throughout the year. In addition, we set measurable goals for our students based on city-wide trends and where our teachers believe our students will be in June 2018. We had an influx of new students in September 2016. Our lower grades, entering students have improved not only their vocabulary, but also letter identification, phonemes and blends. We will continue to need support in building vocabulary along 4  with reading and writing skills. Our 19 other ELLs have shown growth in reading comprehension and writing. We know that as a community, we need to continue to work on reading and writing skills with our ELLs, as these are the areas where our students are weakest based on the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT results. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? To support the administration of running records, the school provides additional prep periods for teachers as well as coverage for assessment activities. There is school wide norming that also take splace. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We measure AYP for our ELL students through the use of portfolios and state tests (NYSITELL and NYSESLAT). Based on the current NYSITELL and NYSESLAT results, we currently have 5 entering, 4 emerging, 4 transitioning, 7 expanding, and 1 commanding student. We believe that our emphasis on community activities that allow for listening and speaking opportunities, and an ELA program that integrates reading and writing, are responsible for this growth in our students. We also measure growth through the TCRWP assessments that are administered 3X a year. Most of our students have improved in their Running Records by moving up levels within their reading as well. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The school relies on flexible scheduling to ensure that all students have access to the supports that they need. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] As a school, we embrace the practices of RtI. However, we understand that there are different interventions that we can utilize with our ELL students at every tier of the process. As with all of our students, we seek to understand their characteristics as children and learners so that we can utilize their strengths to assist with their weaknesses. With our ELLs, this understanding comes from informal classroom observations, conversations with students and their families, data from the Spanish LAB-R (to evaluate their proficiency in the native language), and evaluation of their work. We also utilize data from the RELC to better understand their learning history (SIFE, past test results) and to see if there are major gaps that need to be filled. Information about the socioeconomic status, immigration pattern of the family, and familial support are all qualities that our team (principal, teacher, social worker, guidance counselor, intervention teachers) use to support our children. Our baseline assessments such as the TCRWP, DYO math assessments, allow us to determine where our ELL students fall. We understand that their learning may initially move at a slower pace as they acquire new vocabulary, adjust to a new culture, and learn the structures of our school. What we look for is progress. Is the student growing in reading and writing, speaking and listening? Are they establishing friendships within the school setting? Are they engaged with cognitively challenging instruction? We also compare our ELL students with students of similar backgrounds to see if they are progressing at similar rates while receiving the same types of supports. When we find that our ELL students are not moving at an appropriate pace, we move to Tier 2 interventions to provide supports. Our ENL instructor meets with classroom teachers to share appropriate strategies. Students are placed in AIS, work with our Reading Recovery teacher, and are given intensive small group push-in instruction from our SETTs teacher instruction so that they do not miss what is being taught. For instance, we utilize shared reading and writing to engage students. Teachers link students' background knowledge to make sense of content. Teachers and classmates engage in conversations and the sharing of ideas that assist with language development. Teachers use the LAB-R to identify where the student is strong, and utilize those strengths to make connections with the English language. We provide additional scaffolds related to content - immersion into vocabulary, picture/media support, trips, repetition and the breaking down of lessons - to assist with grasping new ideas. Before recommending a student for Tier 3, teachers with the ENL instructor, Literacy Coach and Principal evaluate whether the 5  ENL setting is appropriate for this particular student. Interventions are evaluated and the team provides the teacher with additional research based ideas to address student needs. If the student continues having difficulty after all these supports have been put into place, then a more comprehensive evaluation has to be administered to see if additional services are necessary. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The NYSESLAT is the primary outcome assessment tool that is use to evaluate and inform the ELL program. Based on the NYSESLAT data from the three previous years, nearly all the students have demonstrated growth by one proficiency level each year. Four of our students have been receiving services for 4 years. All have steadily demonstrated growth on the NYSESLAT. Of the students served 1-3 years, 64% have shown gradual improvements. Of the remaining students, 5 are just beginning with services, and 2 have remained consistently at emerging and expanding levels, respectively. We are able to infer that our students require additional supports in both reading and writing. This data is consistent with our school baseline assessments. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? All teachers meet weekly in grade teams, and there are assessment cycles to ensure that teachers are able to respond to summative assessment data and make informed group choices. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Students are scheduled to best meet the mandated minutes as stipulated in the CR Part 154.2. Entering and Emerging students are grouped together, and Transitioning and Expanding students are grouped together across two grade brands for standalone ENL lessons. Transitioning, Expanding and Commanding students also receive integrated English language instruction during Reading/Writing workshops when the ENL teachers pushes into their respective classes. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Through the collaboration of teachers, cluster teachers, and the Administration, a schedule is submitted for approval containing the required instructional minutes for all our ELLs as per the CR Part 154. English Language Learners receive between 180 and 360 minutes of Pull-out English language instruction every week depending on their levels as determined by the NYSITELL or NYSESLAT. The school utilizes the TCRWP curriculum; language is incorporated into the reading and writing mini-lessons and independent work. Classroom teachers also work with ELLs during small group instructions; many of our ELLs have been identified to participate in RTI groups. These groups target specific language and skills students require to be successful. The ENL curriculum has been adapted from the TCRWP curriculum, structuring in vocabulary, grammar, and early literacy support where needed. The ENL teacher supports HLA through translanguaging, a practice of English language 6  acquisition through the use of home language. Students use their home language as springboard into the new language. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL teacher provides content support for ELL students by meeting with each of the ELL's teachers to find out what topics/themes they are discussing, and the learning strategies they are using in their classrooms. Riverdale Avenue Community School follows a Balanced Literacy Model that includes a school-wide Literacy Calendar that is followed throughout the grade levels focusing on particular reading and writing skills that are reinforced during our ENL instructional time. The ENL teacher is aware of the various stages of Language Acquisition of each ELL student, and therefore, provides age level appropriate visual and audio materials that make content comprehensible and enrich language development throughout instruction. The ENL teacher will also focus on the different genres that reflect the content areas being studied and practicing test strategies that can assist the ELL students during class / formal assessments. The ENL teacher, the classroom teachers, and the support staff work to ensure that all content is appropriately scaffolded to reflect the various needs of our ELLs. Our ELL services are provided in small groups. The small group model gives the ENL teacher an opportunity to work closely with all students and differentiate material as needed. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their native language by conducting an informal interview and completing a survey upon arrival at our school. This helps determine if a student's home language is other than English, or a native language is other than English. Our school takes advantage of the DOE's telephone translation service to ensure we comprehend the student, and may call upon teacher personnel who have a working knowledge of a student's native language to assist as necessary. Initial assessments such as the NYSITELL and Spanish LAB are administered to help evaluate each potential ELL student. Following directions explicitly, and noting on the answer key if the student's native language interfered with the completion of the assessments is important in evaluating a student appropriately. Also, if an informal assessment is needed to evaluate a student, he/she may use both English and the student's native language to complete the assessment. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 6a. Currently, there are three SIFE student enrolled in our ENL Program. We work with these students to determine their individual needs so that they can progress and have a more focused instructional plan to target difficult areas of study. As entering ELLs, they receive 270 minutes of freestanding ENL and 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA in other content areas. We will assess her progress and evaluate what her needs are so that we can continue to develop a plan that will allow her to acquire and improve her English language skills. 6b. Within our ENL Program model, newcomer students receive differentiated instruction by providing materials at varied ability, interest levels as well as their individual learning style. Reading materials that address content and delivered along with daily scaffolds and levels are some ways to differentiate instruction. Providing lessons at varying levels of complexity or at different paces are other ways we offer newcomers ELL students differentiated instruction. It is also critical that newcomers receive not only a large variety of age level appropriate materials but also plenty of visual and kinesthetic opportunities to supplement instruction. Each newcomer (depending on their level) will be given either 360, 180 or 90 minutes of ENL. The students, who are Entering, will receive 360 minutes of ENL, which consists of 180 minutes of freestanding ENL and also 180 min of integrated ENL/ELA. The students, who are Emerging, will also receive 360 minutes of services, which include at least 90 minutes of freestanding ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA. Transitioning students will receive 180 minutes of ENL, which include at least 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA. Expanding students will also receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction, which will include 180 minutes of solely integrated ENL/ELA. 6c /d. At this time, there are no ELL students with 4 or more years of ENL instruction. For future students, we will continue to 7  provide support in all four modalities: Listening, Speaking, Reading, and Writing. Differentiated instruction allows LTE students to have some choice in how they demonstrate what they have learned. 6e. Our former ELLs will receive the same testing modifications as our ELL students. Our former ELLs will receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or another content area. We will collaborate with classroom teachers to ensure that the integrated class time will focus on areas that provide support for our ELLs so that they ultimately can progress and transition to a regular classroom. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The instructional strategies and grade-level materials that teachers of ELL-SWDs use that provide access to academic content and accelerate English language development include Multisensory Computers that have text to speech Software Programs for students to read and listen to on a daily basis. These computers give students one on one assistance with speech translation through the Google Translation Link. Use of an Interactive Smartboard will not only reinforce academic concepts, but provide students with a way to cater to their individual learning styles and learning modalities. Many of the technological methods and strategies can align with students I.E.P. goals / modifications. The TPR Strategy is another was to accelerate English language development through acting out stories or singing and dancing to songs that relate to the Science and Social Studies curriculum or focuses on their native language and culture. Classroom teachers use a variety of instructional techniques, including direct instruction, indirect instruction, and experiential learning in order to support students. Using the workshop model, ELL-SWDs are given the opportunity to access grade level appropriate content, while independently practicing relevant skills and strategies. Our word study approach based, on Orton-Gillingham and delivered through Reading Reform Foundation, allows students the opportunity to accelerate their English language development and participate in the general education curriculum. Differentiate instruction also occurs as a standard part of our instructional day, and students are provided with the opportunity to work with their peers and in small groups. In addition, all of our early childhood classrooms are rich with language opportunities for students. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school meets uses the curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to meet the diverse needs of our ELL-SWD s in the least restrictive environment by making sure that all instructional strategies and grade-level materials the ELL teacher uses align with the New York State Common Core Standards. Providing small group instruction during their mandatory 360/180 minutes of ENL classes as well as an additional 37.5 minutes of support services helps to meet the diverse needs of our ELL students. Scheduling flexibility is demonstrated by the ENL teacher adjusting her schedule to Push-In to a classroom to support a students' needs. I.C.T., C.C.T. and general education classrooms were created in our school to support all students and their special needs. Educational Assistants (Paras) are provided if mandated by the students IEP. Our curriculum allows students the opportunity to access skills at a variety of different levels, supporting their overall development. As part of our instructional process, all teachers participate in a six week assessment cycle, where they continually assessed students in order to inform their practice. This allows teachers to create small, instructional groups, targeted to students’ needs. The flexible nature of these groups acknowledges the times when students make progress and continue to move and push them to greater proficiency. This allows us to support ELLs in their least restrictive environment. As a school wide model, all teachers stay or “loop” with their students for multiple grade levels, meaning that teachers are able to form lasting bonds with students and families, and get to students in an individual manner. In subsequent years, teachers are then able to make even more informed choices about students Creating teacher-made lesson materials and Pairing students based on ability, all reflect our school working to meet the various needs of our ELLs within the least restrictive environment. In addition, the use of leveled libraries, small group instruction (inside and outside the classroom), the use of multiple modalities, and daily opportunities for listening and speaking allow ELLs to read and write at their individual instructional level. Grouping students based on ability, creating Cooperative Learning Groups, and scaffolding instruction are other ways in which we meet the diverse needs of our ELL-SWD's within the least restrictive environment. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 8  For our ELA program, we use the Fundations curriculum in the lower grades and a balanced literacy program in the upper grades. We monitor all of our students’ progress through the Fountas and Pinnell leveled reading system. The ELLs receive additional ELA support through our use of the Moving into English curriculum. We also have a fully certified ENL teacher who provides pullout ENL services that supplement the ELA curriculum and other classroom content. The classroom teachers and the ENL teacher follow a prescribed pacing calendar to ensure that English language learning is supported in multiple contexts. We use the Everyday Mathematics curriculum in our math program. Our ELLs participate fully in all of our content area programs with the support of their classroom teachers and the ENL teacher. All students receive a period of computer technology each week. Computers are also used in every classroom. In the mainstream classroom, our ELLs are given access to laptops, leap desks, and leap pads to further facilitate their growth in English. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? In addition to the ELA programs mentioned above, we are testing the Expeditionary Learning Reading and Writing program with our third graders. The focus of this work will be on the close reading of grade level texts and the strategies to use to understand the ideas presented in complex texts. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We have never had a bilingual program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All students are offered the opportunity to participate in opportunities that help to develop them into individuals with unique interests, passions, and likes. As such, our after school programs seek to develop student’s individual interests. We have a school based chess program that offers students the opportunity to participate in chess club after school. We also offer an after school dance and physical education program for all students. There is both a Girl Scouts and a Boy Scout troop that run out of the school building. Through a CBO partnership, we are also able to offer an after school arts group as well as a book club and newspaper group. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The instructional materials and technology that are used to support ELL's include Individual laptops, C/D. Tape Recorders and Videos are available and used to support ELLs. Web sites that reflect our present learning themes such as Cool ENL Games, Reading A - Z, and Study Island are used to enforce basic skills and content. Reading materials in different genres, non-fiction texts and vocabulary building dictionaries are used in content areas. Our classroom Listening Center includes native language books and magazines to support our ELL students. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is delivered in our Pull Out ENL Program by having literature available to the students in their home languages in both the classroom and the library. The use of Google Translation web sites and other translation web sites such as Reading A - Z help translate information/stories in students home language. Our Reading Series, "Moving Into English" provides native language guidelines and references that relate to many of the countries and cultures of our ELL students. Students may also respond in their home language both orally and written as needed. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Required services support and resources correspond with ELL's ages and grade levels by having students grouped according to their corresponding age level, and are given the opportunity to collaborate and work with their peers as much as possible. Related service providers group students based on both age and ability level, in order to maximize instructional time with students. Related service providers also interact with the classroom teachers to further support and check on student’s development. Activities in The Riverdale Avenue Community School that are provided for newly enrolled ELL students would include a tour of the school building and grounds as well as the student's mainstream and ELL classrooms. Meeting with the classroom teacher prior to school starting, and ensuring that the student will have a "buddy" to help him/her transition to their new school. 9  15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Although our school is in a co-located building, the only resources that are shared are the ENL teacher and the space that she supports small group instruction. Our school provides the necessary materials needed for ELLs at both schools to have their needs met. This includes instructional material and technology, C/Ds, tape recorders, videos, subscriptions to resource websites such as Reading A-Z and Imagine Learning. Both schools have their own set of social workers and host Partnership with Children in the school. Relationships with staff members who share a language with our ELLS have been established. These, combined with the ongoing supports of classroom teachers, enrichment teachers and the ENL teacher ensure that all of our students socioemotional needs are being addressed. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Activities in Riverdale Avenue Community School that are provided for newly enrolled ELL students would include a tour of the school building and grounds as well as the student's mainstream and ELL classrooms. Meeting with the classroom teacher prior to school starting, and ensuring that the student will have a "buddy" to help him/her transition to their new school. Also, making time for the Administration to meet the child so they are aware of each new ELL student and help them feel welcome will also allow for the students to build and foster relationships as they adjust to their new school environment. Through the collaboration of teachers, cluster teachers, and the Administration, a schedule is submitted for approval containing the required instructional minutes for all our ELL's as per the CR Part 154. English Language Learners receive between 180 and 360 minutes of Pull-out ENL every week depending on their levels as determined by the NYSITELL or the NYSESLAT. The Pull-out services are provided to heterogeneous groups of students across grade levels. ELL students, whose proficiency level is identified as a Entering or Emerging level, are scheduled to receive 360 minutes per week. Transitioning and Expanding ELL students receive 180 instructional minutes per week. Commanding ELL students will receive 90 minutes of integrated instruction per week. The school ensures that all ELL-SWD's receives services mandated on their I.E.P. by posting all students I.E.P. on the SESIS Program and through the monitoring and supervising by our I.E.P. teacher. If the student's I.E.P. teacher mandates that he/she receives ENL instruction, it is brought to the attention of the ENL teacher by the SETSS teacher. The ENL teacher immediately inputs the student into the schedule for the appropriate minutes per week. All I.E.P.'s should be reviewed in order to make sure each student receives their mandated accommodations as well to understand how each child may interpret / retain information. The ENL teacher works in collaboration with the classroom teachers, the Children First Network (Cluster 3), and the administration to ensure that all of our ELLs (newcomers, long-term, and those with special needs) receive their mandated ENL minutes per week. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We are an elementary school and do not offer language electives to any of our students. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 0  All staff attends professional development opportunities offered through our network, as well as citywide opportunities. In total, the office staff speaks three different languages in order to better families, and work with the ENL teacher in order to develop a welcoming atmosphere for all families. Staff attends network offered UDL training during the summer and have continued throughout the school year, in order to better plan and prepare lessons for all students. Everyone at Riverdale Avenue Community School supports all our ELL students. The administration, Paras, Guidance Counselor and Special and Regular Education teachers involve themselves in Network Professional Development Seminars as well as professional development options through DELLSS. We attend network meetings that focuses on methodologies and training on topics such as differentiated strategies and academic language development. In addition to this, training has been purchased to with TC to with a specific focus for supporting ELLs in the classroom. Teachers working with ELLs will attend: Develop a Toolkit of Methods to Suppor English Language Learners in Becoming Stronger Readers and Writes and Ramping Up Shared Reading, Shared Writing, and Interactive Writing to Support Grammar and Writing Conventions for English Language Learners. Our certified ENL teacher will attend Professional Development. We take advantage of professional development offered by DELLSS and the UFT / BETACI that include topics such as The Common Core Standards and What you need to know about RTI and the English Language Learner. The ENL teacher may also attend monthly Workshops pertaining to both Compliance and techniques and methods useful in teaching ELL students. In addition, our certified ENL teacher will be providing ongoing professional development on how to support ELL's in the mainstream classroom as well as Turnkey information at Inquiry meetings and Common Planning groups. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our building currently has a fully functional K-5 grade school and a middle school that serves grades 6-8. When the time comes for our students to transition to an upper level school, we will all serve as advocates to the ELL students in every way. We will prepare them with tours, meeting teachers, and information about their new school and what to expect. Parents will also be assisted in order to make the transition a smooth one. In order to foster collaboration between our classroom teachers and our ENL teacher, the professional development conferences we sign our teachers up for are dedicated to language acquisition and a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and how to better integrate language and content instruction for ELLs. Our ENL teacher also attends professional development that speaks to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction. We also send our ENL teacher to conferences that may focus on co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ELLs so that they can be properly supported within the content area instruction. The school secretary registers all teachers for the professional workshops and these are recorded in a Black Binder in the Main Office . In addition, there are agendas and sign-in sheets that have to be provided at the conference itself and also copied for the school secretary so that a current log of PD hours can be properly kept. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents are involved with their ELL child from the beginning of the school year when they attend our orientation meeting and are offered the different options available for ELL services. Throughout the year, the staff communicates with ELL parents in their native language through informational packets and home mailings. A translator is present when there is an IEP meeting or whenever a parent has a question. We have taken advantage of the telephone translation services for Parent Teacher 1  Conferences and other parent meetings. Parent Teacher Conferences (2x a year); extended day goals for students (3x a year) Aris parent website. The Riverdale Avenue Community School promotes Workshops for Parents on the Common Core State Standards Homework Help; Special Education and ELLs. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. We encourage all our ELL parents to come to our school-wide events such as Open House, Dr. Seuss Night, the Art Show, etc. We invite parents both with written invitation translated to their preferred language and orally during pick-up or phone call. For events such as parent/teacher conferences, these are scheduled ahead of time so that arrangements for interpreters can be made. Parents are invited to meetings and encouraged to utilize our "parent buddy" system to discuss issues and school events. This allows for our parents to work together and speak to issues that may only relate to their children. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. As a school, we are aware that we need to offer a bilingual program if there are 15 or more students on one to two grade levels who speak a common language other than English. If we have a drastic increase in our ELL population in the coming years, we will begin to explore that option. 2 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Meghan Dunn, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 3  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Riverdale Avenue Community Sch School DBN: 23K446 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Meghan Dunn Title Principal Renee Martin Assistant Principal Christina Yancey Parent Coordinator Yvelle Thornton ENL/Bilingual Teacher Annette Blackwood Parent Chrissy Connors / SPED Teacher/Subject Area Tamarra Brown / CB Teacher/Subject Area Jacqui Coley Tawana Vasquez Coach Coach Shoshana Diller School Counselor Dr. Miatheresa Pate Camilla Holmes Cassie LaBarbera Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Speech Therapist Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 09/30/2017 1/1/01 09/30/2017 09/30/2017 09/30/2017 1/1/01 1/1/01 09/30/2017 09/30/2017 09/30/2017 09/30/2017 09/30/2017 09/30/2017 1/1/01 1/1/01 4  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 23K446 School Name: Riverdale Avenue Community School Superintendent: MiatheresaPate The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Courtney Thornton Teacher (ENL) Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Riverdale Avenue Community School utilizes the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) data in ATS to determine what languages families speak at home and in which languages they want to receive information. In addition to this, the Parent Coordinator and [Community Associate] surveyed families about their linguistic needs during enrollment, PTA meetings, and Curriculum night. Our ENL teacher tracks current home language needs of families and works to update this report regularly. This information is communicated to the school on the Emergency Contact Blue Cards, as well as any material that is sent home by the school. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 5  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Arabic French Haitian-Creole Bengali 453 12 9 2 2 1 94.57 2.51 1.88 .42 .42 .21 453 12 9 2 2 1 94.57 2.51 1.88 .21 .42 .21 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. n/a Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Handbooks 09/29 Calendars 09/29 Overview of Student Curriculum 09/29 Information for After-School Programs Ongoing How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Handbooks, translated into English, Spanish and Arabic are handed out at the beginning of the school year during our Open House/Curriculum Night. If families miss this occasion, handbooks are mailed home. Calendars, translated into English, Spanish and Arabic are handed out at the beginning of the school year during Open House/Curriculum Night. If families miss this occasion, handbooks are mailed home. Students take home an overview of the curriculum at the start of the school year. During Parent-teachers conferences, teachers explain the curriculum in more depth with parents. Information regarding After-school programs are either sent home with students, or mailed. All letters home are provided in English, Spanish and Arabic. 6  Parent-teacher Conferences Announcements 11/11, 02/22 New York State Testing Dates 03/11-05/04 Letters from the Principal Ongoing Announcements for Parent-Teacher conferences are disseminated to parents at least a month prior to the event so that the parents can schedule their appointments and interpreters can he hired accordingly. Announcements NYS testing dates, we disseminated at least a month prior to the event so that the parents can schedule their appointments and interpreters can he hired accordingly. Letters from the Principal are either sent home with students, or mailed. All letters home are provided in English, Spanish and Arabic. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to School Open House/Curriculum Night 09/29 Parent Teacher Conferences 12/11, 03/22 Family Holiday Event 12/16 provide interpretation service(s)? This is an informal event designed to increase family involvement and community engagement, however participation is not mandatory. Faculty and Staff who speak other languages will provide interpretation services. Any additional translations will be provided through DOE translation phone service. Announcements for Parent-Teacher conferences are disseminated to parents at least a month prior to the event so that the parents can schedule their appointments and interpreters can he hired accordingly. Any additional translations will be provided through DOE translation phone service. This is an informal event designed to increase family involvement and community engagement, however participation is not mandatory. Faculty and Staff who speak other languages will provide interpretation services. Any additional translations will be provided through DOE translation phone service. 7  Dr. Seuss Night 03/02 Family Technology Day 04/21 Arts Showcase 05/17 Books and Brunch 06/09 This is an informal event designed to increase family involvement and community engagement, however participation is not mandatory. Faculty and Staff who speak other languages will provide interpretation services. Any additional translations will be provided through DOE translation phone service. This is an informal event designed to increase family involvement and community engagement, however participation is not mandatory. Faculty and Staff who speak other languages will provide interpretation services. This is an informal event designed to increase family involvement and community engagement, however participation is not mandatory. Faculty and Staff who speak other languages will provide interpretation services. Any additional translations will be provided through DOE translation phone service. This is an informal event designed to increase family involvement and community engagement, however participation is not mandatory. Faculty and Staff who speak other languages will provide interpretation services. Any additional translations will be provided through DOE translation phone service. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency, initial communication with families will be through messenger with the aid of an online translation tool. Follow-up communication will be by phone and the Over-the-phone Interpretation Services will be used. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 8  Office staff will be provided with the Language Identification Guide and they, along with school faculty, will be offered training on how to utilize the Over-the-phone Interpretation Services. A list will be compiled and disseminated indicating staff and faculty who are proficient in a language other than English. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Posted by the entrance of the school, and in the main office, are the language identification poster and fliers. Signage in hallways are translated into Spanish and Arabic. In-house staff who are fluent in Spanish, Chinese, French, Haitian-Creole and Arabic are utilized for translation when needed. Should our staff be unable to translate or interpret the necessary documents, we will hire either an contract vendor or access the Translation & Interpretation Unit for help. A translated notice is sent home to all families, informing them of the translation options that are available to them. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Based on parent surveys, informational letters, and conversations at parent orientations, we gather feedback about the quality and availabilities about the services provided at our school. Parent Outreach is accomplished through meetings, conferences, and contact made by our parent coordinator. During this Outreach, we ensure our parents have the opportunities to meet other parents that they can contact and with whom they can communicate. This year, our Parent Coordinator will be organizing a parent focus group in order to better serve our families and their needs. 9 
