 15K448 School Name: BROOKLYN SECONDARY SCHOOL FOR COLLABORATIVE STUDIES Principal: PRISCILLA CHAN   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Brooklyn Collaborative Studies 15K448 School Number (DBN): 331500010448 6-12 610 Henry Street Brooklyn NY 11231 718 923 4700 Phone Number: 718 923 4730 Fax: ScillChan scill@bcs448.org School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Scill Chan Tom Griffith Reshonah Bennett & Veronica Cruz Marilyn Doore Tracey Pinkard Sierra Edwards David Hudson Aurora Kushner District Information Geographical District: 15 Superintendent’s Office Address: Kathy Rehfield-Pelles Superintendent: 335 Adams St, Brooklyn, NY 11201 krehfield@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-923-5181 Phone Number: 718-923-5145 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Affinity FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Alexandra Anormaliza Executive Director: 335 Adams St, Brooklyn, NY 11201 AAnorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 935-5618 Phone Number: 718-935-5941 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Imani Matthews Tom Griffith ReshonahBennett Eddie Kelly Marilynn Doore Sierra Edwards David Hudson Janet Cooper Ron Fleigelman Lucia Edwards Tish Doggett *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Brian Cohen Chrissy Prince Candice Simon TamikaStyles ScillChan Veronica Cruz Linda Clarke Brim Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Principal Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Brooklyn Collaborative Studies is a diverse and respectful EL Education School, committed to developing students and staff who are kind, open minded, persistent, responsible, and courageous. With support from peers, staff, families and school partners, students engage in challenging academic and social experiences that prepare them for college-level learning and full participation in civic life. Students learn to apply their intellect and effort to benefit themselves and their community.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Brooklyn Collaborative Studies is a comprehensive grades 6 through 12 school located in District 15 in Red Hook/Carroll Gardens in Brooklyn. Our current register is 681 students. The majority of our students (68%, June 2018) are eligible for free or reduced lunch. Our student body is composed of 37% Black, 46% Hispanic, 12% White, 3% Asian and 2% Other. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. About 32% of our students are students with disabilities (SWD) who have Individual Education Programs (IEP’s) and about 7% of our students are ENLs. We have 34% of students who miss 18 or more days of school. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. STRENGTHS: Our teachers exemplify collaboration. They are committed to success and improvement of all students in their classrooms. They engage in thoughtful planning to support scaffolded instruction for a wide range of learners. The impact of our collaboration is evidenced through the Learning Environment Survey (2018, 4.15 for Collaborative Teachers) and in our high graduation rate (90% in 2016-17). STRENGTHS/NEEDS: Rigorous instruction lives at Brooklyn Collaborative. Through our intensive syllabus work in departments, our instruction is aligned to the Common Core and incorporates diverse assessments and multiple opportunities to show mastery. We scored a 4.04 in Rigorous Instruction on the 2017-18 Learning Environment Survey. In order to continue to grow and develop rigorous instruction and pedagogy (and to address the only Quality Review indicator (1.2) where we only received proficient and not well developed, in 2015-16), BCS needs to deepen the cycles of observation using the Danielson Framework to inform teacher practice, and goals and support teacher development resulting in improved high quality student work. BCS also needs to be explicit about teaching diverse learning needs into consideration when designing learning activities and stating clear expectations for students to talk with each other (not just teacher-student) and build on each other’s ideas. NEEDS: We consistently work to build a supportive environment. We have active partnerships with EL Education, NYC Outward Bound Schools, the Morningside Center for Social Responsibility, Groundswell, the YWCA and the Red Hook Initiative. Through these partnerships we are able to better serve our students and enhance our culture and character work. These partnerships provide a range of services for the school from after school programming to targeted student interventions. Partnering with Morningside Center for Teaching Social Responsibility and OSYD has allowed us to train staff in using restorative practices. Enhanced Restorative Practices implementation helps students build and maintain supportive relationships with staff---making them more likely to be engaged by school. In our 2018 Learning Environment Survey, we were about 8-10% below the borough and city average in positive scores for Supportive Environment. In 2018-19, our goal is to track course pass rates, Habit of Scholarship grades, attendance, and our Restorative Practices log schoolwide to inform the positive correlation between higher levels of mastery and consistently demonstrating habits of scholarship and character. NEEDS: In the 2017-18 Learning Environment Survey, our score for Effective School Leadership was 3.01. The admin staff will continue to lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff. We will aim to use more data to inform PD choices to ensure that we schedule and develop instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. We will continue to plan regular Case Study Coaching days with our EL School Designer that give staff the targeted support they need to refine their curriculum to impact student learning. In 2018-19, school admin will continue to demonstrate our instructional leadership by organizing regular data dives with 0  teacher-leaders including twice yearly Quality Work Protocols, regularly reading and giving feedback on syllabi, and leading teachers in intervisitations to see best practices in helping students to produce high quality work including revision protocols. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 15K448 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08,09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 681 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 6 7 8 8 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 55 30 8 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 68.0% % Attendance Rate 63.0% % Reduced Lunch 6.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.7% 45.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 11.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.17 0% 10% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 33.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 92% 2% 90.9% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 305 301 4 86.9% 4.8% 32.3% 37.4% 2.8% 2.3% 4 29% 6.6 15.1% 19% 16% 2% 90.8% N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. When students make real world connections to their learning, they are more engaged which leads to higher levels of academic achievement. The real world connections are customized and motivating and aligned to high CCSS standards, where students are actively engaged in ambitious tasks and developing critical thinking skills. Our curriculum is grounded in expeditions and case studies because this work gives students first hand knowledge to make them practitioners in their field and ensure accuracy, integrity and quality in the work they do. They build both academic and character skills, understanding that the work they do matters. We have been working with teachers to develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs by creating an online data tracker for current student mastery based on the learning progression rubrics Grades 6-12. We created a schoolwide syllabus template which will be collected from all staff at the beginning of the year which outlines learning targets, alignment to standards, key resources, differentiation, formative and summative assessments, and other key information that supports the thoughtful development of rigorous instruction. Teachers have common planning nearly every day to create interdisciplinary curricula including select targeting of the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers work together to develop complex tasks that are engaging opportunities for students to demonstrate mastery of knowledge and skills. Our theory of action is if teachers design more on-demand tasks, students will have multiple opportunities to demonstrate independent mastery of the long-term learning targets. The summative tasks (including on-demand tasks) must require that students examine multiple perspectives, connect to big concepts, and apply higher order thinking skills. In order for students to do complex work, students need to grapple with challenges independently. This involves discovering the logic of their ideas and organizing these thoughts in a clear way to an academic audience. Students must read, interpret and analyze complex texts in preparation for high quality writing. Additionally our students need greater opportunities to have their knowledge and skills assessed on-demand, to reflect their ongoing mastery levels aligned to course long-term learning targets and schoolwide learning progressions. Teachers will use Skedula IO classroom, our online learning progressions rubric, and formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and 3  ownership of learning including of their Habits of Scholarship which are assessed at least four times a quarter with feedback provided to students on areas of strength and improvement. Our strengths in this area: -Curriculum taught through case study and expeditions in research-proven EL Education school model -in 2015-2016, we received a well developed in 1.1 Curriculum on the Quality Review -an Instructional Guide and a EL School Designer that provides direct coaching to teacher teams about rigorous instruction -we have a full-time ENL teacher (in addition to our current F-status ENL teacher) to provide even more targeted supports for our ENL students to access rigorous instruction -our syllabi show clear alignment to the Common Core and other relevant national standards -we have a schoolwide grading policy to ensure high standards are set in every classroom, based in mastery grading Our needs in this area (addressed by this goal/action plan): -in 2015-2016, we received a proficient in 1.2 Pedagogy on the Quality Review -teachers need to design tasks that demand more complex thinking from students which can be assessed independently and on-demand -teachers need more PD to develop protocols and practices that allow students to grapple with complexities -teachers need more support in mastery grading implementation, including extending our partnership with the Mastery Collaborative -supports for students who are below grade-level mastery -students need more/regular on-demand opportunities to be engaged in ambitious intellectual activity that shows their independent mastery levels and critical thinking skills Staff Learning Targets/Focus Areas in this area include: 1. 2. 3. I can consistently use the online grading platform to implement mastery-based grading and support student growth. I can design a diverse array of assessments (including on-demand) for each course long-term learning target. I can teach into the purpose of the learning progressions (and TC reading levels and Math IAs). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 4  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students demonstrate grade-level mastery (a numerical score of 75+) on course long-term learning targets through at least three summative assessments per long-term learning target, including at least one on-demand assessment. In the first semester, teachers will develop at least one on-demand summative assessment aligned to a long-term learning target in their course. In the second semester, by June 2019, teachers will develop at least two on-demand summative assessments aligned to a long-term learning target in their course. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Deepen cycles of observation including giving feedback on high quality learning targets to support with clarity of student mastery and collect artifacts/examples of on-demand summative assessments across classrooms through walkthroughs and observations. Department leaders will participate in fall and spring High Quality Work Protocol to norm common definition of high quality work and higher order thinking, multiple perspectives, and transfer of knowledge by looking at student work Regularly review data sources including student achievement data and mastery levels. This ensures that strategies are addressing the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups. Develop PD to support assessment creation of on-demand tasks and alignment to schoolwide learning progressions (and Math IAs) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Instructional staff Sept-June Admin and department leaders Instructional staff Sept-June Admin, Department leaders and teachers All students Sept-June Instructional Leadership Team Instructional staff Sept-June Admin, Instructional Guide and teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Sept-June: We have regular presentations by staff about mastery grading and instructional practices (grading by learning target, summative and formative assessments, roundtables, etc.) in our monthly PTA meetings, SLT meetings, and Family Breakfasts. Sept-June: We also regularly update our webpage with information to help families engage and support their understanding. Sept-June: We include family representatives in our core EL Education meetings 4x a year along with our teacher-leaders. The key personnel in supervising Family Engagement are AP Imani Matthews and Parent Coordinator Tracey Pinkard, who work in collaboration with each other and admin to engage families in academic programming implementation. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 6  We have one instructional guide who teaches ½ time and coaches ½ time. This coaching work is focused on data analysis to support students at no mastery, the development of case studies and expeditions and fieldwork, supporting teachers on developing rigorous assessments including on-demand tasks. EL Education School Designer supports with facilitation of High Quality Work Protocol in Fall and Spring. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Baseline Review the PBAT data tracker (which records students' grade level mastery on long-term learning targets) to see areas of strength and need in our student body related to the schoolwide learning progressions, review the TC reading level assessment data in lower grades to inform instruction and grouping, review the Math interim assessments in Grades 6-12, analyze June 2018 course passage rates (by demographics) Mid-Year: Collect examples of on-demand assessments & rubrics, review exit slips from MBG PD, minutes from staff inquiry groups, examples of lesson plans that teach into learning progressions or importance of math IAs, examples of data-based mastery support structures, examples of how staff build in opportunities for students to reflect & set goals on their own mastery, evidence of small group student interventions / supports (executive functioning, organizational skills, non-cognitive factors, etc.) End-of-Year: Review all data sources listed in mid-year including presence of on-demand summative assessments in online grading platform, PBAT data tracker, LG TC reading level assessment, Math interim assessments, Course passage rates, Course passage rates & number of NUs, Reports from new grading platform Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) IO Classroom gradebooks showing the presence of at least one on-demand assessment for each long-term learning target per course by June 2019. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? As a school, for the last six years, we have been moving towards full implementation of restorative practices. Restorative practices are supportive instructional methodologies that allow students to take responsibility for their own learning and own actions within a classroom and school. They support students by focusing on community and reparation instead of punishments and consequences. The fundamental restorative practices used at our school are restorative questions and circles to build community, to strengthen relationships, and to address concerns and harm. Three years ago, we added a second Restorative Practice Coordinator. Last year, we also added a Restorative Practices Support person to help with interventions, mediations, and parent outreach related to low level infractions. High quality support staff help to establish a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Similarly, our Culture and Character Committee (CCC), a representative leadership body composed of crew team leaders, school support and administrative staff, has met weekly this year to look at our implementation and will continue to meet bi-weekly next year. We have found that there is a need for more active PD and training to make sure that all staff understand restorative work. We believe that in order to develop students who are "leaders of their own learning" and in their community, they need strong relationship skills and a growth mindset. This work is supported through our commitment to restorative practices, our core values, our school wide habits of scholarship and our crew curriculum. We also believe that the development of students' relationship skills, habits, and mindset is integral to academic achievement. Learning Targets for Staff/Leadership in this area include: 1. 2. 3. I can consistently use school wide structures the promote strong habits in students (Habits of Scholarship learning targets, circles, restorative follow up flow chart etc) I can develop targeted interventions for students struggling with Habits of Scholarship and Habits of Character I can use data to analyze disproportionality in our practices and develop action plans to address it furthering our commitment to social justice. Strengths: 8  -in 2013-2014, we scored Well Developed on Quality Review indicators 1.4 and 3.4 related to school culture and a supportive environment; in 2015-2016, we scored Well Developed on Quality Review 3.4 High Expectations -in our 2017-18 Learning Environment Survey, 91% of students said that they feel safe in their classes, 96% of teachers said that adults at the school teach students how to advocate for themselves -Bi-weekly Culture and Character Committee mtgs -Two full time Restorative Practice Coordinators + 0.5 half time RPC support staff member -Support from Morningside Center -Restorative Practice Coordinators and Support staff trained in Restorative Practices and Collaborative Problem Solving though the DOE -A Restorative Practices Center to house this work in within the school (Rm 416) -Two school counselors to support the Restorative Practices team in ongoing counseling supports for students with concerning behaviors and lagging skills Needs: -in our 2017-18 Learning Environment Survey, 53% of students said that most students follow the rules in class, 39% of students said that most students behave well even when the teacher isn't watching, 71% of teachers said that students follow the rules in class -More staff PD on classroom management and supportive structures in the classroom -we had 479 entry logs in the Restorative Follow Up Request Log from Sept 2017-June 2018 in Grades 6-8 Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. All BCS staff are able to effectively use Restorative Practices to foster positive habits and behaviors. Staff will use the Restorative Discipline Guide and the WOW flowchart to foster positive habits and behaviors. We will have a 5% reduction in infractions in grades 6-8 from June 2018 to June 2019 as measured by the RP Follow Up log of total infractions. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Continue to develop crew curriculum, Incorporate at least 2 weeks of health curriculum into crew calendars, Minimum two gradewide town halls per year that include celebrations of strong Habits of Scholarship, Develop and facilitate community building circles, Crew teams look at attendance and lateness data and follow up with advisees, Plan Better World Day, Use of RP follow up flow chart to have WOW conversations to follow up on student behavior, crew team analyze trends in RP log and adjust crew curriculum accordingly. Monthly RP data mtgs (kid talk) to create targeted interventions for students struggling with HoS or HoC and looking at disproportionality (including students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups.) according to data, Develop and facilitate academic check in circles to promote our Habits of Scholarship, including Habits shout outs Student perception survey completed in crew at beginning, middle, and end of year to gauge understanding of supportive habits and responsibility taking; convene three student focus groups about student ownership and pride around high quality work Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Staff Sept-June Culture and Character Committee and Leadership Team Staff Sept-June Academic Team Leaders and Admin Students Sept, Jan, June RPCs, Culture and Character Committee, and Leadership Team Track incidents using our RPC referral document to see infraction level and restorative interventions RPCs Sept-June RPCs and Leadership Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Sept-June: We have regular presentations by staff about school programming and restorative practices in our monthly PTA meetings, SLT meetings, and Family Breakfasts. Sept-June: We also regularly update our webpage with information to help families engage and support their understanding. Sept-June: We include family representatives in our core EL Education meetings 4x a year along with our teacher-leaders. The key personnel in supervising Family Engagement are AP Imani Matthews and Parent Coordinator Tracey Pinkard, who work in collaboration with each other and admin to engage families in academic programming implementation. 0  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In terms of human resources, we have budgeted for 2.5 full time Restorative Practices Coordinators to implement Restorative Practices at BCS. Additionally we are partnered with the Morningside Center who provide us with a part time staff developer and crew curriculum. EL Education School Designer supports with facilitation of a Fall and Spring retreat for our RPCs and Culture and Character Committee. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Monthly, we will review and count the RP Follow Up log in Culture and Character Committee and crew teams. As a mid-year benchmark in Jan 2019, we will have a 2% reduction in infractions in grades 6-8 from June 2018 to Jan 2019 as measured by the RP Follow Up log of total infractions. We will have a total of 5% reduction in infractions in grades 6-8 from June 2018 to June 2019 as measured by the RP Follow Up log of total infractions. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Restorative Practices Follow Up log Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. At BCS we work with our Pedagogical Leadership Team and Consultation Committee to develop a PD plan for the year that closely aligns with our yearly goals and meets the needs of our staff and students. We have chosen to devote the majority of our Monday PD time to department meetings. These meetings are run by our department heads but are co-planned during our bi-weekly PLT meetings to ensure that as a school our PD is consistent and well aligned with school-wide goals. In the 2014-2015 school year we focused the majority of out department time on the creation of high quality tasks. Teachers worked with Expeditionary Learning protocols to analyze and reflect on the tasks they gave students to complete and on the quality of the final product the student produced. In 2015-2016 we refined that focus to look specifically at high quality writing. The work aligns directly with our Regents Wavier. All students in all grades wrote a “PBAT” this past school year in all their core classes. Though the vertical alignment of high quality writing tasks aligned to a schoolwide rubric (learning progressions, which are aligned to CCSS, the PBAT rubric, and field standards if applicable for the subject, like NGSS in Science) we tracked great improvements in student writing and independence. In 2016-2017, department meetings continued to be devoted to looking at writing and year-to-year progress across our seven-year arc. We believe that if students are clear on what they are expected to learn as well as their current level of mastery (as measured by the learning progression), they will be better able to demonstrate proficiency and deeper understanding in all core subjects. We believe that having school-wide, standards-aligned curriculum maps will ensure that students will achieve a higher level of mastery of a diverse body of knowledge and skills. Two areas of intentional focus were writing, aligned with the Brooklyn Collaborative learning progressions; and in math, where interim assessments (collaboratively designed and vetted by the department) were used to monitor school=wide mastery of key grade-level math knowledge and skills. In 2017-18, department meetings continue to focus on supporting students to achieve mastery on grade-level standards. Teams will analyze areas of deficiency in student mastery using data from 2016-17 PBAT Tracker (aligned to schoolwide learning progressions) and develop instructional strategies to address gaps in learning. True to our school name, our mission is about working together for the success and improvement of our classrooms and schools. Our professional learning calendar is structured to have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Needs: 2  -in the 2017-18 PBAT Learning Progressions Growth Tracker for Argument Writing, using the schoolwide learning progressions rubric, 75% of students made one or more years of progress in Thesis (compare to 31% at or above grade level in Thesis in 2016-17), 79% of students made one or more years of progress in Analysis (compare to 2016-17 when 24% were at or above grade level in Analysis), and 67% of students made one or more years of progress in Conventions (compare to 33% of students were at or above grade level in Conventions in 2016-17). -in the 2017-18 PBAT Learning Progressions Growth Tracker for Lab Report, using the schoolwide learning progressions rubric, 67% of students made one or more years of progress in Hypothesis (compare to 29% of students were at or above grade level in Hypothesis in 2016-17), of 69% of students made one or more years of progress on Analyze Data (compare to 51% were at or above grade level in Analyze Data in 2016-17), and 63% of students made one or more years of progress on Revise Design (compare to 24% of students were at or above grade level in Revise Design in 2016-17). -in the 2017-18 PBAT Learning Progressions Growth Tracker for Literary Analysis, using the schoolwide learning progressions rubric, 75% of students made one or more years of progress in Thesis (compare to 53% of students were at or above grade level in Thesis in 2016-17), 76% of students made one or more years of progress in Analysis (compare to 43% were at or above grade level in Analysis in 2016-17), and 79% of students made one or more years of progress in in Conventions (compare to 40% of students were at or above grade level in Conventions in 2016-17). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. As a result of teacher team work and collaborative curriculum development and pedagogical alignment Grades 6-12, students will demonstrate proficiency and deeper understanding in all core classes through roundtable participation, including presenting written work aligned to schoolwide learning progressions rubric and an on-demand component of roundtables. Students will demonstrate greater mastery of knowledge and skills. We will have a 5% increase in number of students at grade-level proficiency in grades 6-12 from June 2018 to June 2019 as measured by the PBAT Data Tracker. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will participate in regular moderation studies in department meetings, looking at student work collaboratively in teams using the schoolwide learning progressions rubric to measure progress in mastery of knowledge and skills. Teachers will review baseline data from PBAT Tracker to inform instruction. Teachers refine interim assessments, including on-demand assessments, aligned to the schoolwide learning progressions in all core classes to chart student progress in key learning standards, aligned to CCSS and CUNY readiness standards. Teachers vet the interim assessments through collaborative review protocols. Calendar out PBATs/roundtables using the online grading platform -- within department and grade, Teams can look at student work together, after they are mapped, and use these as an interim assessment to see progress students make over time Leadership norms roundtable procedures to ensure alignment to the schoolwide rubric, collects syllabi for every course to ensure seven-year arc 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Staff Sept-June PLT (department heads) Staff Sept-June PLT (department heads) Staff Sept-June Departments Staff Sept-June Instructional Leadership Team How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Sept-June: We have regular presentations by staff about school programming and instructional practices in our monthly PTA meetings, SLT meetings, and Family Breakfasts. Sept-June: We also regularly update our webpage with information to help families engage and support their understanding. Sept-June: We include family representatives in our core EL Education meetings 4x a year along with our teacher-leaders. The key personnel in supervising Family Engagement are AP Imani Matthews and Parent Coordinator Tracey Pinkard, who work in collaboration with each other and admin to engage families in academic programming implementation. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 4  We have an instructional guide who teaches ½ time and coach ½ time. This coaching work is focused on the development of case studies and expeditions that result in high quality student work. EL Education School Designer will meet with the instructional guide and admin as well as teachers to help review data and plan instruction that yields high quality student work, aligned to CCSS and our schoolwide learning progressions Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, we will have a 2% increase in number of students at grade-level proficiency in grades 6-12 as measured by the PBAT Data Tracker. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. PBAT Data Tracker using the schoolwide learning progressions rubric Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In June 2014, our former principal left BCS - she was our founding principal and at our helm for thirteen years. With any large leadership transition, staff communicated through town halls, emails, meetings and Consultation Committee that they wanted stability in leadership and consistency in vision. We wanted to make sure we were explicit and transparent about how the new leadership team would develop norms, protocols and structures to set the tone for a healthy school community in her absence. This transition continued to be successful in the 2017-2018 school year but we want to continue to make sure we reflect and assess our effectiveness as a leadership team. To do so we will continue our weekly leadership team meetings. These include our bi-weekly admin meetings, our Instructional Leadership Team (Admin and Instructional Guides), our Restorative Practices Leadership Meetings (admin and Restorative Practice Coordinators) and our Pedagogical Leadership Team (Admin, Instructional Guides and Department Heads). Through these meetings we are able to reflect regularly on our goals for the year and continue to work on school improvement. Since we are a restorative practices school, we want to use evidence-based practices to examine and improve critical school-wide practices particularly around fostering open communications, a growth mindset, development of teacher leadership, and adult and student social emotional health. Two years ago, we piloted listening circles where admin had open-ended prompts where staff were able to share what was on their minds, admin took notes and responded holistically. This fostered trust in leadership and was a commitment to shared decision making. Strengths: -"Effective School Leadership" was rated highly on the 2016 and 2017 Learning Environment Survey (ex. in 2016, 93% of teachers felt the principal works to create a sense of community in the school, 98% of teachers felt that the principal makes clear to the staff his or her expectations for meeting instructional goals, etc.; in 2017, 92% of families said that the principal is strongly committed to shared decision making and 95% of families say that the principal promotes family and community involvement in the school) -Experienced leaders with diverse instructional and administrative backgrounds. -EL Education support with leadership development. -School-wide routines established for BCS professional meeting norms. -School-wide email system to facilitate regular communication. 6  Needs: -Models/best practices of effective communication formats used in other schools to reach staff, families, and students. -Routinized practice in sticking to protocols in meetings, having common/shared minutes/agendas, and having a process observer as a norm. -Continue to develop feedback loops (esp listening circles) so that all staff has the opportunity for input. -in 2017, the overall score for Effective School Leadership on the Learning Environment Survey decreased from 3.98 (2016) to 3.01 (2017) Leadership Learning Targets in this area include: 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. I can develop relational trust in the staff to support transparency and inclusion. I can implement listening circles to foster open communication between staff. I can design PD that supports achievement for all students. I can set clear expectations for teachers about implementing what they have learned in PD. I can analyze curriculum alignment to standards and the learning progressions. I can participate in instructional planning with teams of teachers (including around mastery grading implementation schoolwide). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Leadership Team will send monthly summaries to all staff after classroom walkthroughs noting where we have seen evidence of teacher utilization of what they learned in PD, citing strong mastery grading practices, and highlighting examples of curriculum explicitly aligning to the schoolwide learning progressions and . We will have a google form after the summary is sent out to solicit feedback and interaction around the Leadership Team observations/recommendations. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Uphold and communicate a decision making structure to staff that follows EL core practices and allows for shared leadership. This means that we will develop and use clear feedback loops utilizing the use of the ABCD decision making structure (a tiered decision making protocol that is shared with the staff). To ensure regular open communication, we will hold weekly Leadership Team and Pedagogical Leadership Team meetings, monthly staff town hall meetings, and biweekly Admin meetings, all using common agenda/minutes formats. Communicate positively and effectively with school community. We will develop regular and clear communication pathways to staff. This will be done through weekly staff e-mails and quarterly full staff listening circles and town halls. This will also be done through the use of the department heads who will turn key information gathered in our Pedagogical Leadership Team meetings. We will carve out opportunities to promote staff trust building and relationship building and opportunities to celebrate success. Leadership Team will send monthly summaries to all staff after classroom walkthroughs noting where we have seen evidence of teacher utilization of what they learned in PD, citing strong mastery grading practices, and highlighting examples of curriculum explicitly aligning to the schoolwide learning progressions and . We will have a google form after the summary is sent out to solicit feedback and interaction around the Leadership Team observations/recommendations. Leadership Team monitors mastery grading implementation schoolwide, soliciting feedback on clarity of expectations from staff and reviewing gradebooks and number of logins from students/families of new grading platform Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All staff Sept-June All staff Sept-June All staff Sept-June Admin will revisit decision making A,B,C,D and feedback loops in school and make necessary adjustments and publish to staff and use regularly in leadership meetings. Admin develops professional norms/common agendas/minutes for all leadership groups; admin coordinates weekly staff and family emails. Admin conducts walkthroughs and writes summaries; admin creates google form All staff Sept-June Mastery Implementation Team and admin plans PD and feedback structures to support mastery grading implementation schoolwide 8  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Sept-June: We have regular presentations by staff about school programming and instructional practices in our monthly PTA meetings, SLT meetings, and Family Breakfasts. Sept-June: We also regularly update our webpage with information to help families engage and support their understanding. Sept-June: We include family representatives in our core EL Education meetings 4x a year along with our teacher-leaders. The key personnel in supervising Family Engagement are AP Imani Matthews and Parent Coordinator Tracey Pinkard, who work in collaboration with each other and admin to engage families in academic programming implementation. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We have one instructional guide (teacher-leader). Teacher leaders meet with school leaders once a week. Mastery Implementation Team meets monthly at school. Mastery Implementation Team meets quarterly with the Mastery Collaborative. School designer (SD) assists with use of student and teacher data to drive leadership conversations about instruction and student achievement. SD supports intervisitation, walkthroughs, and sharing of leadership protocols in the EL network that may be useful. SD gives feedback on PD calendar and facilitates PD as needed. SD gives feedback and praise to leadership teams as necessary. SD supports with PLT mtgs and teacher-leadership development. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. During November, Jan, March, and June, meeting agendas and minutes will be regularly checked by admin to make sure that BCS meeting norms and common agendas/minutes are being utilized. We will do check ins about the decision making process in Feb during our annual Mid-Year Huddle and review notes from process observers captured in new leadership team minutes. We will develop a mid-year feedback form for staff to collect feedback and suggestions about methods of communication and clarity of new leadership roles. We will have quarterly listening circles between staff and leadership to support communication and input. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Learning Environment Survey, meeting agendas and minutes; EL Mid Year Huddle; Walkthrough summaries, Google form feedback on walkthrough summaries, IO Classroom Gradebooks, Number of logins from students/families in IO, Feedback from mastery grading PD, Listening circle notes Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In the NYC Learning Environment Survey 2017-2018 Report, we had an overall score of 3.89 for Strong Family-Community Ties, which was 0.4 points higher than the borough average. 90% of families said that school staff regularly communicate with them about they can help their child learn; 97% of families said that they are greeted warmly when they call or visit the school; 94% of families said that they feel well-informed by the communications they receive from the school. These responses painted a portrait of a strong parent connection to the school. In 2016-17, we had 74% of our families attend Student-Led Conferences (SLCs) in March. In 2017-18, we had 63% of our families attend SLCs in March. We would like to increase participation in our SLCs. There is a disconnect between the positive feelings the parents have about BCS and their level of consistent participation in the life of the school community, including getting involved in the PTA, attending Student-Led Conferences, and taking part in students celebrations of learning and roundtables and PBATs. The need, therefore, is to strengthen parent involvement in their child’s education process. At BCS, we have student-led conferences twice a year. Student-led conferences (SLCs) require and empower students to take the lead role in communicating their learning to their families. According to EL Education, "[SLCs] help build dispositions and skills - such as adapting speech to the appropriate context and organizing and presenting information - that will be vital for students in college and careers and is at the center of the Common Code speaking and listening standards. Sharing work and reflecting on learning with one's family helps to bridge the divide that often exists between school and home and enables parents to understand their children's progress more deeply." Strengths: -Favorable responses by parents on the Learning Environment Survey. -Continued admin focus on strengthening parent engagement -Seven year arc to build relationships with families -New family initiatives to build on next year -More active involvement in the PTA Needs: -Increased participation by families in Student-Led Conferences. 0  -Continue to expand the variety of ways parents can become involved in BCS, including non-English speaking families Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. To increase parent attendance by 5% from the Spring 2018 Student-Led Conference to the Spring 2019 Student-Led Conferences. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Track attendance at Fall Student Led Conferences to see if there is increase from Spring 2018 Student Led Conferences. Determine patterns in student/parent subgroups who did not attend and implement strategies to encourage their participation. At least 3 weeks prior to the Student Led Conferences, Crew leaders will make initial contact by phone to their individual crew families to schedule a meeting for their child’s Student Led Conference. If crew leaders need a translator, they will indicate and provide this information to the parent coordinator who will secure translation services, both on-site and/or through the DOE. She will compile the request of translation information on an excel spreadsheet.School leaders will include announcements about the Student Led Conferences in the weekly family emails as well as post them on the school’s website. Announcements will be made at least 1 month before the scheduled Student Led Conferences. Dates for the Student Led Conferences are included on the school calendar at the beginning of the school year. Parent coordinator will assist crew leaders in their outreach of hard to reach families (e.g. wrong numbers, LTAs, etc.). She will also do additional PR by sending out robocalls and providing crew leaders with fliers for their students to take home. Post-Student Led Conferences, crew leaders will continue to reach out to set up meetings with parents who were unable to meet during the scheduled days. Parent coordinator will provide crew leaders with any necessary support to schedule these meetings. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Families Nov Crew leaders contact parents Families Feb-Mar School leaders will publicize Student Led Conferences Families Feb-Mar Parent coordinator assists crew leaders Families March - end of year Crew leaders, with parent coordinator assistance, do follow up outreach to crew families If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 2  YWCA Afterschool, Morningside Center for Teaching Social Responsibility Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Crew leaders will work with our school secretary to get the most updated parent contact information . Our parent coordinator works to reach parents we have trouble getting in touch with. She will also coordinate multiple forms of outreach (robo call, fliers, texts, phone calls, etc.) and attendance recording documents for Student Led Conferences. AP will align school calendar and develop Student Led Conferences materials for crew leaders. We will use staff as translators as well as translation services to reach families who don’t speak English. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We expect a 2.5% increase in SLC participation in our Nov 2018 Fall conferences. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We collect teacher attendance sheets which parents sign in on during conferences. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) assessments in ELA class; previous year’s ELA exam score if available; reading level; teacher observation; student/family request; report card grade;TC Reading Assessments assessments in Math class; previous math exam score if available; Math IA assessment, student/family request; teacher observation; report card grade assessments in Science class; student/family request; teacher observation; report card grade assessments in Social Studies class; student/family request; teacher observation; reading level; report card grade Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) small group instruction; re-teaching; guided reading conferences, diversity of books at appropriate independent reading level Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) during the school day, afterschool small group pull-out, one-to-one reading support with support staff person, afterschool/ lunch tutoring small group instruction; re-teaching; IXL online support; study teams small group pull-out, afterschool/ lunch tutoring, online individualized support during the school day, afterschool, online individualized support small group instruction; re-teaching small group pull-out, afterschool/ lunch tutoring during the school day, afterschool small group instruction; re-teaching small group pull-out, afterschool/ lunch tutoring during the school day, afterschool 4  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) student/family request; teacher observation; OORS data; RP Log, previous incidents; history of bullying; ACS referral; report card grades counseling; peer mediation; restorative meetings; circles; guidance intervention; family meetings small group, one-to-one, as needed, referrals for families to outside agencies during the school day 5  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 20 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We provide extended outreach to students and families to best know their individual needs. We provide basic and emergency supplies such as books and book bags, we provide counseling services, we provide access to our afterschool program, and fees for participation in school trips. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 6  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 7  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. We hire staff by a committee comprised of a diverse group of staff members and school leaders through a rigorous multi-phase process, including the following: a) reading through resumes and screening for candidates whose experience best complements our school’s mission and vision; b) formally interviewing candidates; c) requesting an on-demand writing sample that focuses on the candidate’s understanding of the BCS Core Values and the requirements for being a successful Crew (advisor) leader to a group of 15 secondary school students; d) requesting and assessing the candidate’s demo-lesson and sample unit plans. Teachers are assigned based on student need and teacher strengths as determined through teacher observation and interview responses. We support and retain our teachers through providing ongoing in-house professional development that is aligned with the Danielson Framework for Teaching and Expeditionary Learning (EL)-- led by veteran teacher-leaders---which includes the following: a) weekly department meeting to enrich teacher curricular content, instruction, pedagogy, and assessment; b) bi-weekly grade level and crew (advisory) meetings to enhance horizontal curricular alignment and strengthen teacher support of adolescent development. The school leadership also leads the entire staff in professional development workshop at least once every other month. We provide our first & second year teachers as well as teachers new to BCS and the DOE with a formal mentor who regularly meets with them to support their transition, acclimation, and professional growth. Our new teachers also participate every other week in group meetings facilitated by our Instructional Guides who provide ongoing professional development in areas including expeditionary learning pedagogy and practice, curriculum planning, Student-Led Conferences, BCS community, best classroom practices, observations, and classroom management. Our Department Leaders and two Instructional Guides deliver professional enrichment to the whole staff through providing ongoing non-evaluative observations and feedback. As a PROSE school, school leaders encourage and support teacher inter-visitation to provide professional development and feedback for teachers. Our Instructional Leadership Team, which includes the Instructional Guide and the three school leaders uses data provided by staff: 1. preference sheets 2. knowledge of their curricular and pedagogical strengths 3. areas of growth to make assignment decisions. 8  We inform, encourage, and support all our staff in regularly participating in on site and off site professional development through our partnerships with Teachers College Reading & Writing Project, Expeditionary Learning, and Urban Advantage. Our staff also take advantage of professional development opportunities provided by Affinity and NYC DOE. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). All staff create syllabi—EL Education curriculum maps—that align to the CCSS and are reviewed by and provided with detailed feedback from department leaders. Our Pedagogical Leadership Team (department heads, instructional guide, admin) lead non-evaluative teacher intervisitations to facilitate implementation of CCSS units and meeting CCSS standards. PD takes place on and off site. All staff participate in ongoing professional development around the CCSS practices through our partnerships/affiliations with EL Education, the Performance Standards Consortium, Morningside Center, and College Preparatory Math. Department leaders, with the support from the Pedagogical Leadership Team, lead weekly department meetings. They design agendas to support colleagues in the development and strengthening of CCLS aligned unit plans. Paraprofessionals meet as a group in their own professional learning community that addresses their classroom role, and examining the CCSS and looking at pedagogical strategies that they can utilize to support their student and the classroom teachers including facilitating student-centered discussion protocols and coordinating study groups based on ability grouping. Admin receive ongoing support and professional development through NYC Outward Bound Schools, EL Education, the Superintendent's Office, Affinity Field Support Center, and the Performance Standards Consortium. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 9  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Our school pedagogical leadership team in partnership with the UFT reps meets monthly to discuss our PD plan as well as assessments used in our classes. The department heads also solicit feedback from their departments during their weekly department meetings. In August 2014, a Local Measures Committee--comprised of teachers and administrators--was selected to review the State and Local Assessment measures to be used for teacher evaluation and instruction purposes. Members of the committee participated in a DOE MOSL training during the summer and officially met several times between 9/3 – 9/12 to discuss which measures were to be used. The committee made MOSL recommendations to the principal, which were agreed upon, and shared with the full staff. The recommendations linked the local measures to our the subject PBATs and were based on the following criteria: · Equity in evaluation as a 6-12 school; · Commitment to the PBATs as an authentic measure of student success; · Not adding tests and high stakes assessment to students. In every year since, including in 2017-18, our MOSL committee met again and determined that the MOSL for teachers this year would be the ELA Regents. This was due to changes in how state assessments were used in MOSL and equity in evaluation as a 6-12 school. Staff were provided with multiple professional development opportunities on how to uses the Local and State Assessments to improve instruction. We held an introductory meeting in September about our MOSL recommendations run by the MOSL committee. During Initial Planning Conferences (IPCs) teachers were given the opportunity to discuss and select the observation schedule that will best inform and enhance their instruction. We reconvene this committee every year to assess and adjust the MOSL as needed. We also meet regularly as a Consultation Committee to include teachers in decisions regarding all school topics including assessments. 0  Teachers receive professional development in their departments and from their school leaders about using data from assessment to improve instruction, including effective standards-aligned diagnostics, ability and readiness groupings and station teaching, and differentiation to support all learners. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E N/A 5A N/A 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 382,038.00 N/A 12,366.00 N/A 5,415,639.00 x N/A x N/A x 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. 1  Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Brooklyn Collaborative Studies, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Brooklyn Collaborative Studies will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 3  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 4  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Brooklyn Collaborative Studies, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 5  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 6  ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; 7  ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 8  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 9  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Our School Leadership Team has used the Data Analyses and Title III AMAO Estimator Tools to identify areas of need among our ELL students. Having instant access to this data and analysis has allowed us to make more informed decisions to accelerate academic achievement of our ELLs. We have gleaned that our ELLs need to improve in the area of writing. In addition, our beginning ELLs need practice in listening and speaking. Furthermore, reading comprehension could be improved across the board. To those ends, we have structured our Title III Program into two parts, an after school class that will focus on building basic academic language in English and an after school tutoring and Regents test prep program to meet the demands of our diverse group of learners. Our goal is to increase the academic language of our ELLs as well as their academic achievement in the core areas by offering our students extended time for speaking and listening activities as well as project-based hands-on activities that will increase language development and academic achievement. Additionally, we will provide opportunities for youth to explore their interests and creativity. Our program will foster social and emotional competencies and physical well-being. ELLs will learn how to identify and manage their emotions as well as self-reflect upon their experiences. Our BCS core values of Kindness, open-mindedness, persistence, responsibility, courageousness and collaboration will guide our study. Our academically rigorous standards-based instruction, which focuses on scientifically based methodologies, will utilize a variety of materials that integrate listening, speaking, reading and writing and foster critical thinking skills. Our ELLs will be provided with instructional strategies to assist them in the development of academic language and literacy. The six major types of scaffolding-modeling, bridging, contextualization, schema building, text representation and metacognition, will be evident in our Title III Program. Furthermore, our ELLs will experience strategies and discussion protocols for presenting their original writing and engaging with the writing of their peers. Our After School Title III class will support a total of 18 ELLs. Sixteen of these students are in grades 6-8 and two are in grades 9-12. Moreover, five of these ELLs are Entering, six are Emerging, five are Transitioning and two are Expanding. Also included is one ELL with an IEP. Our class will be taught by a New York State permanently dual licensed teacher in ESL and Spanish. Students in this class will focus on building basic academic language in English through the themes of school, family, community and food. Students will develop language, build vocabulary and develop reading and writing skills using the ESL texts, Family and Friends and Grammar and Friends. Furthermore, in spring 2019, students in this class will be engaged in a variety of creative arts-based enrichment activities which explore their social identities. In order to activate prior knowledge, our students will examine their own family immigration experiences and the experiences of others through a critical media lens. Additional texts that will be used in spring 2019 will be related to our immigration unit, such as Inside Out, Immigrant Kids, Enrique's Journey and I Was Dreaming To Come to America: Memories from the Ellis Island Oral History Project. These texts will help ELLs better understand the way immigrants helped shape New York City and our nation. Moreover, bilingual trade books in Spanish, French, Chinese, Bengali and Arabic will be purchased, as well as writing and art 0  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information supplies. The bilingual materials, used as additional support to ELLs in our program, will supplement many of the English materials that are already available to our students. Teacher made materials will be utilized at no cost to the Title III Program. Furthermore, ELLs in our class will use a flip camera, also at no cost to the Title III program, for our collaborative group inquiry oral history video project. Using this camera to interview each other, our ELLs will create oral histories of their families. These short videos will be edited into one long movie and viewed in our class. The program will culminate with a sharing out of our class video and student art to the parents and families of ELLs within our larger school community. Our program will meet the needs of our ELLs with IEPs through inquiry-based curriculum, using these hands-on materials. Our ELLs speak different languages and have different interests, cultural background, styles of learning, reading levels and different degrees of skills and strategy mastery that necessitate a flexible approach to teaching varying content. By individualizing assessments, creating plans that focus on familiarization with various techniques, and providing native language materials, our program will be successful in meeting all its goals. Our class will meet from November 2018 through mid June 2019 on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 3:15 to 5:15, exclusive of school holidays. Instruction will be delivered in English. Records will be kept in a secure file cabinet in the ENL room by the ENL teacher, including student attendance and program notification in parents' preferred language. The 2nd component of our Title III Plan is our After School Tutoring and Regents Test Prep Program, which will support a total of 12 ELLs in grades 8-12, with ranging levels from Entering through Expanding. Individualized instruction will be provided depending on the English proficiency levels of students and teaching will be differentiated based on specific academic and language development needs. Our after school class will address ELL linguistic challenges through academic support in all core subjects areas. ELLs will receive scaffolds to deepen the level of their writing in preparation for their Performance Based Assessment Tasks in English, History, Science and Math. Furthermore, time will be devoted to English Regents prep, including personal narrative, literary analysis and argument writing support. Classes will meet from November 2018 through June 2019 on Friday afternoons from 3:15 to 5:15, exclusive of school holidays. Instruction will be delivered in English. Records will be maintained in a secure file cabinet in the ENL room by our ENL teacher, including student attendance and program notification in parents' preferred language. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Professional Development is an essential component of our academic success at BCS. Our ENL teachers, Melissa McClure, Michele Rayvid, Magen Rodriguez and Angela Jones, will collaborate with staff and share best practices. Both Melissa and Michele also receive ongoing PD through monthly ELL Institutes offered by our Affinity Group Field Support Center. Melissa, a New York University educated instructor, with a joint M.A. in Teaching Spanish as a Foreign Language and TESOL, brings a number of methods and approaches from time spent in the classroom here in the U.S. and abroad. Michele, who is dual licensed in both TESOL and English 7-12, is an experienced QTEL participant and attends the Bank Street 1  Part C: Professional Development Annual Language Series, citywide conferences on ELL instruction and other appropriate professional development opportunities as they are offered throughout the school year. Magen Rodriguez, a New York University educated instructor, also holds a joint M.A. in Teaching Spanish as a Foreign Language and TESOL and brings a wealth of experience in social activism and youth engagement. Our newly hired teacher, Angela Jones, holds joint licenses in both English and TESOL. Furthermore, our Principal, Priscilla Chan, also a QTEL participant and our Assistant Principal, Amanda Boege, a licensed ENL teacher, will assist in conducting ongoing professional development workshops for all BCS teachers throughout the year during professional development days and weekly staff meetings to share instructional strategies to meet the needs of our ELLs. PD records will be kept in a secure file cabinet in the main office, including agendas and attendance sheets. These workshops take place on Mondays from 3:10 pm to 4:15 pm from September to April for our entire staff and are at no cost to the Title III program. Our hope is that this ongoing PD will positively impact the progress of ELLs as our teachers will be better informed to make instructional decisions based on knowledge gleaned from these sessions. Among the topics addressed are: Second Language Acquisition 9/17/18 Language and Content Objectives for ELLs 9/24/18 Scaffolding for ELLs 10/11/118 Academic Vocabulary Development for ELLs 11/5/18 Differentiating Instruction for ELLs 12/3/18 Looking at the Writing of ELLs 1/14/19 Understanding the NYSESLAT 2/11/19 Assessment Regulations for ELLs 3/18/19 Translations and Interpretation Services 4/1/19 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Our Title III Program has an open door policy that welcomes families and partners with them to encourage and support the program's goals. Families are encouraged to contribute ideas, volunteer, and attend the culminating student presentation. These initiatives extend positive learning practices at home for our ELLs. To further engage families, we will also offer four 2 hour classes to parents of ELLs during the spring. These classes will take place on Wednesday evenings from 6-8 pm on 3/13/19, 4/10/19, 5/8/19 and 6/5/19. In these workshops, provided by our licensed ENL teachers, Melissa McClure, Michele Rayvid, Magen Rodriguez and Angela Jones, parents will receive Rosetta Stone access and training to augment their acquisition of English. In addition, parents will obtain information on topics of interest regarding the education of their ELL children, including the following: Accessing Resources for ELL Families in the Community, Standards and Assessment, Homework Help and Supporting Your Child's Learning. We anticipate that 20 parents will attend these evening events. Furthermore, our ENL teachers will provide translated information to parents. Families will be notified of all these activities through translated flyers that will be sent home with students. 2  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Our afterschool program provides quality daily supplemental instruction for our ELL students, requiring supplies for the mixed-media projects, texts, and video recorders as described above 12366 3  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 15 School Name Brooklyn School for Collaborative Studie Borough Brooklyn School Number 448 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Scill Chan Coach Beth Mowry ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Michele Rayvid Teacher/Subject Area Melissa McClure/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Magen Rodriguez/Spanish Related-Service Provider Haniyfa Noel Superintendent Kathy Pelles Assistant Principal Amanda Boege; Imani Matthews Coach Devon Shanley School Counselor Deb Rothenberg Parent Moises Vaval Parent Coordinator Tracey Pinkard Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 4  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 652 Total number of ELLs 44 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 6.75% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): N/A If yes, indicate language(s): N/A Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? BCS is an Expeditionary Learning (EL) School. As such, formative assessment in our EL school is communicated to students, staff and families through use of learning targets. These learning targets state goals for mastery, such as "I can identify how the author uses literary elements in the text." These clear learning targets provide a structure for the implementation of performance based assessment. Furthermore, BCS uses both the TCRWP and the Bader Reading and Language Assessment Inventory to assess the literacy skills of our ELLs. The data obtained from these assessments is used as a valuable tool for collecting and recording information about a child's oral reading and comprehension. This helps inform our school's instructional plan by giving us valuable categories of information to place students in groups and to plan for individual, small group and whole class literacy instruction. Data reveals that our ELLs struggle in reading comprehension, especially with main idea and inferential type questions. Furthermore, we have gleaned that most of our ELLs, in fact, have come to us with 5  functional language in English, but lack conceptual skills in their native language. This presents significant challenges, as the linguistic abilities of our ELLs do not often match the needs of the classroom. We have found that our ELLs do well with concrete language and the use of visuals in the classroom, and that the greatest indicators of successful learning are the concepts that they bring to their second language. Yet, as the demands of the curriculum increase, beginning in middle school, our ELLs often struggle with the abstract academic language used in the classroom. Recognizing the stages of language acquisition that our ELLs go through, pre-production, speech emergence, intermediate level and advanced fluency, BCS teachers are able to align expectations with the appropriate stage of language acquisition. Additionally, our teachers recognize that, in the best of circumstances, acquiring academic language requires three to five years of instruction. That is why it is very difficult to move our ELLs from Performance Levels 1 and 2. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Our AIS Committee meets weekly to discuss specific intervention services that are needed. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? BCS has an online database and teachers are required to fill in student benchmarks periodically throughout the year to identify baseline, progress and areas of need. At the beginning of the year, teachers are asked to review data. Furthermore, teachers administer reading assessments and fluency screenings several times a year. Additionally, BCS is a member of the NY Performance Standards Consortium and uses performance based and portfolio assessment for summative assessment. Our Performance-based Assessment Tasks (PBATs) require students to demonstrate a wide range of skills: read, reason, write, revise, consider, present and defend their individual work to peers and teachers. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Our AIS Committee and our classroom teachers gather and analyze data from our summative assessments and make instructional decisions base on their findings. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our entire school uses data from our ongoing informal assessments to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention framework. We all engage in end of unit assessments from the core curriculum, leveled running records, orthographic assessments and anecdotal notes. RTI navigates our entire school improvement process for all learners in order to reduce the number of students who experience academic and behavior obstacles. As a school, our teachers work together within the RTI instructional model to engage in ongoing informal assessments and monitoring that identify at-risk-learners. We provide appropriate academic intervention support for those students who are struggling with both academic and behavioral issues. We focus on what students can achieve and search ways to personalize instruction for all our learners, including ELLs. Our 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Outcome assessments data from the NYSESLAT, ELA, Math and Regents is used to evaluate and inform our ENL program. Our ENL teachers utilize the RLAT from ATS to monitor the listening, speaking, reading and writing progress of our ELLs and design curriculum accordingly. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Our ENL teachers share these findings with our AIS Committee in order to make adjustments to our program. Our school administrators monitor all adjustments to our program. Part IV: ELL Programming 6  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. ELL instruction in our freestanding English as a New Language program at BCS is organized through both Integrated and Stand-Alone ENL in grades six through twelve. Whenever possible, ELL students are heterogeneously placed in one ELA class on a grade so that our ENL teachers and our ELA teachers can provide Integrated instruction to support academic language learning and collaborate on writing specific language goals as well as content goals for our ELLs. If there are ELLs needing an Integrated Collaborative Team Teaching placement, we also try to program our ELLs together so that our ESL teacher can support these students in an Integrated ENL class. Because our ELL population is so small, we are able to arrange schedules so that ELLs are serviced within their ELA classroom or pulled out to the ENL room. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Our ENL scheduling allows us to meet the linguistic needs of all our 44 ELLs and to comply with Part 154 mandates. Thus, in grades 6-8, entering and emerging ELLs 180 minutes of standalone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA per week. Transitional ELLs receive 90 minutes of standalone ENL and 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA per week. Expanding ELLs receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA instruction per week and our commanding ELLs receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA instruction per week for two years after they achieve proficiency. In grades 9-12, entering ELLs receive 180 minutes of standalone ENL and 360 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA instruction per week. Emerging ELLs receive 180 minutes of standalone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA per week. Expanding ELLs receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA instruction per week and our commanding ELLs receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA instruction per week for two years after proficiency. Because our ELL population is so small, the number of instructional minutes our ELL students are receiving is easily monitored by our Principal, our two Assistant Principals and our Parent Coordinator. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our ENL teachers work with our staff to support scaffolded classroom learning in content areas and differentiated instruction for our ELLs. Our Balanced Literacy approach follows the workshop model of Teachers College, which includes active engagement time for students to independently practice what they have learned during the mini-lesson. This rigorous standards-based instruction that meets the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards utilizes a variety of materials that integrate listening, speaking, reading and writing and foster critical thinking skills. Furthermore, all our ELLs are provided with a variety of instructional strategies to assist them in the development of academic language and literacy. The six major types of scaffolding – modeling, bridging, contextualization, schema building, text-representation and meta-cognition – are evident in all our classrooms. In addition, our students experience the following consistent common teaching practices in all academic classrooms including the content area: explicit learning targets, research-based comprehensive strategies and discussion protocols for engaging in accountable talk. We believe that when ELLs are given appropriate school experiences, academic intervention and high expectations, they can achieve at the same levels as their peers and that adolescents learn best when skills are embedded in big investigations of real-world problems. We design rigorous inquiry-based curriculum, resulting in students using real-world tools for discovery, analysis and expression of their learning. Technology and the arts are 7  essential to our mission. Because we are an Expeditionary Learning (EL) School, structure and focus for our work comes out of EL’s five core practices, Active Pedagogy, Learning Expositions, Culture and Character, Structures and School Leadership and Improvement. Our teachers work together in teams to design interdisciplinary curriculum, plan experiences to make sure we know our students well and support their growth in character as well as academic skills, and to carry out our school’s transition to a Performance Based Assessment (PBAT) system, as we are a Regents-exempt school. Our status as an EL school helps us to maintain coherent vision and continuous school improvement during a time of extremely dynamic growth and change for our school. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? All entering Spanish-speaking ELLs are administered the Language Assessment Battery in Spanish when they first enter our school. Our New York certified Spanish teacher, Megan Rodriguez, administers this formal assessment. Because we are a DYO school, with a diverse population of Spanish, French, Cantonese, Mandarin and Arabic speaking staff, we are able to devise our own formal assessments to appropriate evaluate ELLs in their own native languages. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Because BCS is a diverse learning community, our instruction needs to be differentiated. Our ELL students have different languages, backgrounds, interests, styles of learning, reading levels and different degrees of skills and strategy mastery that necessitate a flexible approach to teaching varying content, process, and products. Instruction for our SIFE students has been especially challenging. By making an individualized student needs assessment, creating an AIS plan that focuses on literacy and math and providing differentiation of instruction using grade appropriate instructional support and intensive native language support, our SIFE students are achieving success. Similarly, BCS has a plan for ELLs in United States schools for less than 3 years. These Newcomers are welcomed into our school and made to feel comfortable and secure. Our buddy system pairs newly arrived ELLs with students who speak the same language and also serve as good English models. Teachers create opportunities for our Newcomers to listen to English and interact with other students in small groups as well as opportunities for newly arrived ELLs to participate in classroom projects that support language development. Targeted academic intervention in ELA, mathematics, science and social studies during the school day, as well as after school, is also offered to our Newcomers. Newcomers are also encouraged to attend our afterschool YMCA program and make social connections. Additionally, to prepare for the NYS ELA exam, our Newcomers are given individualized needs assessments, with an AIS plan that focuses on literacy and math and provides differentiated instruction using grade appropriate instructional support. Similarly, our instructional plan for ELLs receiving service 4 to 6 years involves intensive daily academic support for 50 minutes during lunch. Our Transitional Student Support plan ensures that ELLs who pass the NYSESLAT receive testing accommodations and ELL support for two years. Our plan for our Long Term ELLs involves creating individual needs assessments and creating an AIS plan that focuses on literacy and math. Our plan for former Ells involves ELL support and testing accommodations for two years after existing ELL status, as per CR Part 154.2. All ELLs and Former ELLs (who have passed the NYSELAT within the past two years) receive testing accommodations in the form of additional time, use of word-to-word bilingual dictionaries, and separate testing space, if necessary. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELL-SWDs use a variety of instructional strategies and grade-level materials that provide access to academic content and accelerate English language development. Our method of instruction is a combination of TPR, CALLA and The Natural Approach. Our ENL teacher works with our staff to support scaffolding classroom learning and differentiated instruction for our ELL-SWDs. Our Balanced Literacy approach follows the workshop model of Teachers College and our teachers provide scaffolds to enable our ELLs to process new information. This rigorous standards-based instruction utilizes a variety of materials that integrate listening, speaking, reading and writing and foster critical thinking skills. These materials are aligned to our school curriculum and reflect the native language of our English language learners. Included in these materials 8  are colorful photo libraries, bilingual dictionaries with accompanying workbooks, Scott Foresman Newcomer books, Hampton-Brown Avenues Level A-D, Benchmark English Explorers social studies and science books, as well as our comprehensive classroom libraries and books on tape. To support use of the native language, our classrooms libraries contain many bilingual picture and chapter books, bilingual non-fiction science and social studies books and bilingual picture dictionaries. The native language is used in the classroom to support high challenging content area instruction. Furthermore, all our ELL-SWDs are provided with a variety of instructional strategies to assist them in the development of academic language and literacy. The six major types of scaffolding – modeling, bridging, contextualization, schema building, text-representation and meta-cognition – are evident in all our classrooms. Furthermore, our IEP teacher monitors ELL scheduling to ensure that all ELL-SWDs receive all services (ENL, speech, and OT/PT) on their IEPs and our Pupil Personnel Committee meets weekly to review all mandates. Our school also ensures all ELL-SWDs, whose IEP mandates bilingual instruction, receive an alternate placement paraprofessional. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school uses curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to meet the diverse needs of ELLs-SWDs within the least restrictive environment. To maximize time spent with non-disabled peers, our ELL-SWDs participate in flexible ICT settings. Furthermore, one of our school's greatest accomplishments over the last few years has been the establishment of a school-wide Integrative Collaborative Team Teaching Program. We began with one 6th grade ICT class more than ten years ago, and slowly expanded the program so that there are many more ICT classes in grades 6-12. All students, including ELLs, who need more continuous support than they receive in SETTs, now have an appropriate supportive classroom placement in our school. With many more ICT classes, and numerous general education students receiving SETTS, speech/language support or occupational therapy support, we now have a larger number of ELL-SWDs. This year, fourteen out of our forty-four ELLs have their own Individual Educational Plans, reflecting their individual needs and goals. Our plan for these students has been collaboration between the ENL teachers, the classroom teachers and the IEP teacher to ensure that all our ELL-SWDs are serviced as per their IEP and are receiving proper accommodations and modifications. Furthermore, we seek to meet the needs of these students through inquiry-based curriculum and strong AIS structure. Our inquiry team has been studying the needs of our struggling math students, looking closely at students with IEPs who have lost ground in the past year. By understanding the challenges these students face, we believe we can help all our math students, including our ELLs. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. BCS has comprehensive Academic Intervention program for all students in need, including English language learners. Targeted intervention in literacy, math and science takes place throughout the school year and our ELLs are afforded equal access to these services. BCS has daily crew/advisory, which focuses on academic support skills, including a heavy emphasis on reading assessment and raising reading levels through sustained silent reading. All students receive scaffolded reading support for independent reading from a teacher who documents their reading growth, as well as native language support. Furthermore, our school encourages struggling students to seek after school small group academic support. During school vacations, we run academic programs, for example focusing on writing a research position paper for the social studies performance-based assessment (PBAT). Additionally, teachers offer academic support during the school day and after school. In the area of mathematics, BCS offers Extended Day Math and Math Peer Tutoring to small groups of students, including ELLs and transitional ELLs. Moreover, we have a program of selectives, in which all students, including ELLs, choose from a variety of classes that provide enrichment and acceleration, particularly in the areas of technology, math, science and the arts. Credit recovery classes are also offered in lowered class size during the school day. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the upcoming school year, conversational English classes for Newcomers as well as NYSESLAT and English Regents prep classes for ELLs will be considered. We are also considering beginning a dual language program at our school in the near future. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 9  11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs, both curricular and extracurricular. All students, including ELLs, are invited to partipicate in our extensive after school academic support such as small group tutorials in math, science, English language arts and social studies. Furthermore, targeted instruction in reading, PBAT support as well as ELA and Math test prep is offered to all students, including ELLs. Additionally, ELLs can participate in academic support during lunch and during school vacations. Our enrichment classes and our recovery credit programs are also open to all ELLs. Moreover, ELLs comprise a large percentage of our extracurricular Robotics Club. Our ELLs also participate in our vigorous Vocational Internship Program which links them to opportunities in their fields of interest. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The materials used in our Freestanding ENL program are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. This includes the use of high interest non-fiction texts and primary sources. Materials include native language sources and instructional technology to support both English and the mother tongue of our English language learners. As part of our academic day, newly enrolled ELL students receive native language support and instruction from our large bilingual staff. Recognizing that reading and writing in the native language supports the acquisition of English and that concepts learned in the native language strengthen language acquisition in English, BCS has acquired bilingual classroom libraries and stories on tape in several languages. Teachers support both reading and writing in the native language and encourage students to incorporate their native language, culture and experiences in classroom projects that are personally meaningful to them. In addition, bilingual dictionaries as well as culturally relevant books are evident in all our classrooms. Our ELLs are provided with opportunities for meaningful interactions in both English and their native language, including verbal interactions and engagement with printed materials and books. Furthermore, all our ELLs are provided with a variety of instructional strategies to assist them in the development of academic language and literacy. Effective practices such as graphic organizers, semantic maps, concept maps, modeled writing and read aloud foster academic language development and are utilized in all our classrooms. Classrooms are print rich with word walls, rubrics, student work and charts modeling correct language usage. Moreover, BCS maintains a state of the art computer lab and computers and smart boards are distributed in most classrooms throughout the school. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Because educators at BCS recognize that a child's native language is a valuable asset to be fostered, we also provide native language support to our ELLs through our Spanish classes and through daily interactions with our large staff of bilingual teachers and paraprofessionals. Additionally, the Spanish language and Latino culture are important parts of the school-wide curriculum and we take great pride in our yearly Latin Family Dance Party. Furthermore, the materials in our Freestanding ENL program are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. This includes the use of high interest non-fiction texts and primary sources. Materials include native language sources and instructional technology to support both English and the mother tongue of our English language learners. As part of our instructional day, newly enrolled ELL students receive native language support and instruction from our large bilingual staff. Recognizing that reading and writing in the native language support the acquisition of English and that concepts learned in the native language strengthen language acquisition in English, BCS has acquired bilingual classroom libraries and stories on tape in several languages. Teachers support both reading and writing in the native language and encourage students to incorporate their native language, culture, and experiences in classroom projects that are personally relevant to them. In addition, bilingual dictionaries, iPads with google translate apps, as well as culturally relevant books are evident in all our classrooms. Our ELLs are provided with opportunities for meaningful interactions in both English and their native language, including verbal interactions and engagement with printed materials and technology. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required services support and correspond to ELLs' ages and grade levels and best suited to their cognitive needs. In the 6th grade, for example, ELLs receive support in writing narrative and literary essays aligned with CCSS RL 6.1, RL6.2, RL6.6 and W6.1. At the high school level, ELLs receive support in deepening the level of their writing in preparation for their PBATs in English, Math, History and Science as well as the English Regents. 0  15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our school shares a building with Brooklyn New School (BNS), a kindergarten to 5th grade school and we are fortunate to have a close bond with our sister school downstairs. There is an enormous amount of collaborative between our two schools. Our older students volunteer to work in BNS classrooms and serve as mentors to the younger ones. This fosters community and establishes a sense of pride in our students. Younger students benefit from being read to by our high school students, which serves to establish social bonds in our community. Moreover, older ELLs are introduced to younger ELLs and regularly visit each other. Both schools share a common gym, cafeteria and auditorium, and our staggered school schedules ensure that our shared spaces are harmonious. Both BCS and BNS administrators meet weekly to ensure that all the ELLs' academic, linguistic, socioemotional needs are met. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Brooklyn School for Collaborative Studies offers ELLs and their families many opportunities to ease the transition into our school. During the month of May, incoming students and their families attend orientation, meet our staff and visit our classrooms. In addition, our New Families Picnic, held at the end of the summer in Prospect Park, enables new students, including ELLs, another opportunity to meet our staff and get to know other children who will soon be attending school. During the summer, classroom teachers welcome all of their new students with an introductory letter and school packet. These materials are translated into the home language of our new students. Furthermore, on the first day of school, BCS holds parent orientations. To meet the needs of parents of ELLs in their native language, we provide oral interpretation and translation services at all our activities, with the assistance of our Language Access Coordinator, our dual language staff members, as well as dual-language volunteers from our active parent body and community. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish language electives and sign language are offered to all students, including ELLs. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional development, provided by school staff, is a high priority at Brooklyn School for Collaborative Studies. Our ENL Teachers have recently attended a series of Differentiating Instruction for Language Development workshops at Bank Street College Graduate School of Education as well as workshops at Teachers College. In the recent past, they have also attended TC Calendar Days, Quality Teaching English Learners (QTEL) Workshops as well as Wilson Reading Program training. As part of our continuing commitment to maintain and expand professional development, we place staff development concerning the needs of English language learners at the top of our agenda. At our weekly Monday afternoon staff meetings, we continue to offer all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff additional inquiry opportunities with a focus on support for ELLs in meeting Common Core Learning Standards. Furthermore, to assist our ENL teachers in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards, our ENL teachers attend monthly PD at our Network that revolves around the Common Core 1  Learning Standards and ELLs. Moreover, since our school embraces Expeditionary Learning, our entire staff engages in Expeditionary Learning PD sessions throughout the school year and ultimately ensures that all staff members are afforded opportunities for PD in accordance with the new CR 154.2. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our ENL Teachers, in collaboration with our Middle School Director, licensed in ENL, and our Cantonese-speaking High School Director, trained in QTEL, provide professional development , including the minimum hours of ELL training for our administrators and staff in second language acquisition, including scaffolding learning for ELLs, integrating content and language goals and differentiating language instruction for our English language learners. Non-ENL teachers, paraprofesionals, School Based Support Team, our guidance counselors and our speech therapists also attend the training. As a community, we examine our curriculum maps and learning targets and design templates for integrating specific language structures, functions, scaffolds and vocabulary for our ELLs. Our staff well understands that for ELLs, every lesson is a language lesson as well as a content lesson. Our Principal and our two Assistant Principals take attendance for all professional development activities as well as provide agendas in order to maintain records. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Each year, in addition to initial parent orientations, parent-teacher conferences and grade level breakfasts, our ENL teacher meets individually with the parents or guardians of all English language learners . At these annual meetings, many topics are discussed including goals of the ENL program, language development process, language proficiency assessment results and language development needs in all content areas. Interpretation and translation are provided as needed. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parental involvement is key to our mission and is supported by monthly letters, personal invitations to PTA meetings, our Parent Coordinator’s direct contact with families and student-led Parent-Teacher Conferences. To inform this partnership, our teachers write descriptive progress reports and report cards and all families are scheduled for at least two lengthy parent conferences each year with their child’s teacher. Teachers and families also communicate regularly through email and phone calls and our Parent Coordinator keeps parents up-to-date on school news and events via email. Families are seen as unique resources for the entire school and are welcomed in every classroom. Parental participation is encouraged, whether it is coming on a class trip, a weekly or monthly commitment to help with a particular classroom activity or a contribution focused around an annual event such as the Curriculum Share. Our welcoming school environment celebrates diversity and encourages parents of English language learners, as well, to become part of our school community by participating in classroom expeditions, writing celebrations, parent workshops and school trips. Displays of student work outside all classrooms greet our ELL family members. In addition, parents of ELLs are invited into our classrooms to share their culture, language and life experiences. Parents of English language learners are a valuable resource within the classroom and often assist BCS teachers with classroom learning, performances, day and overnight trips, as well as serve as mentors for high school students. As required by Part 154-2, we offer Parent Orientation Workshops to parents of new ELLs in September and when necessary, throughout the school year. We also offer two other workshops, which address such topics as Homework and Study Skills and Understanding Your Child’s Curriculum, to parents of ELLs during the school year. In addition to the mandated workshops, our Parent Coordinator offers workshops with topics that include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations, literacy, accessing community and support services and technology training to build parents' capacity to help their children at home, Common Core Learning Standards and promotional policy. All ELL parents are invited to these workshops and translation is available as needed during these events. 2  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 3 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Priscilla Chan, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 4  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: 448 School DBN: 15K448 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Scill Chan Title Principal Amanda Boege Assistant Principal Tracey Pinkard Parent Coordinator Michele Rayvid/ENL ENL/Bilingual Teacher Moises Vaval Parent Melissa McClure/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Magen Rodriguez/Spanish Teacher/Subject Area Beth Mowry Devon Shanley Coach Coach Deb Rothenberg School Counselor Kathy Pelles Imani Matthews Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Assistant Principal Haniyfa Noel Other Related Services Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 5  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 15K448 School Name: BCS Superintendent: Kathy Pelles The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) Michele Tracey Rayvid Pinkard ENL Teacher Yes Parent Coordinator Yes Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. In an effort to develop the necessary lines of communication with families who have limited or no English language oral and/or written skills, BCS has various structured mechanisms in place. When first entering the NYC DOE school system, our students' families are given a Student Registration Form, a Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) and an Emergency Contact Card. This helps us know and track the written and oral language preference of parents in our school community. Our school uses the Adult Preferred Language Report (RAPL) to verify the preferred language of our families. Our Language Access Coordinators ensure that all communication with our families is translated into the preferred language in a timely manner. 6  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Albanian Arabic Bengali Cantonese English Ewe French French-Haitian Creole Fulani German Haitian Creole Mandarin 0 2 0 1 610 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 Pilipino (A.K.A Tagalog) 0 Portuguese Spanish 0 37 0 .30 0 .15 0 2 0 1 98.47 608 0 .30 0 0 0 .15 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 .30 0 .15 .93 0 .30 0 0 0 .15 .15 0 0 5.67 37 5.67 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. From the list of parents' preferred languages provided in the previous question, there are no languages, other than English, that represent at least a 10% population of our school according to our updated reports. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Student Contact Information September BCS Student Fees September Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Bilingual staff will translate. We will also request written translation from the DOE's T&I Unit for languages that our school staff does not speak. Bilingual staff will translate. We will also request written translation from 7  Fieldwork Permission Slip September Attendance Policy September Electronics Policy September Appropriate Use Policy for Technology September Library Use Policy September Anti-Bullying Policy September Anti-Plagiarism Policy September Photo Consent Form September Level 1 Career Assessment September Eating Lunch Outside the Building Policy September DOE Military Opt-Out form (Grade 12 students only) September School Lunch Form September the DOE's T&I Unit for languages that our school staff does not speak. Bilingual staff will translate. We will also request written translation from the DOE's T&I Unit for languages that our school staff does not speak. Bilingual staff will translate. We will also request written translation from the DOE's T&I Unit for languages that our school staff does not speak. Bilingual staff will translate. We will also request written translation from the DOE's T&I Unit for languages that our school staff does not speak. Bilingual staff will translate. We will also request written translation from the DOE's T&I Unit for languages that our school staff does not speak. Bilingual staff will translate. We will also request written translation from the DOE's T&I Unit for languages that our school staff does not speak. Bilingual staff will translate. We will also request written translation from the DOE's T&I Unit for languages that our school staff does not speak. Bilingual staff will translate. We will also request written translation from the DOE's T & I Unit for languages that our school staff does not speak. Bilingual staff will translate. We will also request written translation from the DOE's T & I Unit for languages that our school staff does not speak. Bilingual staff will translate. We will also request written translation from the DOE's T & I Unit for languages that our school staff does not speak. Bilingual staff will translate. We will also request written translation from the DOE's T & I Unit for languages that our school staff does not speak. Bilingual staff will translate. We will also request written translation from the DOE's T & I Unit for languages that our school staff does not speak. Bilingual staff will translate. We will also request written translation from 8  PSAL Forms - Medical Clearance September Progress Reports November & March Family Weekly Letter September - June the DOE's T & I Unit for languages that our school staff does not speak. Bilingual staff will translate. We will also request written translation from the DOE's T & I Unit for languages that our school staff does not speak. Bilingual staff will translate. We will also request written translation from the DOE's T & I Unit for languages that our school staff does not speak. The BCS website, which includes our Family Weekly Letter, has an integrated automatic translation service for Spanish, Arabic, Chinese, French and Haitian Creole. We will also request written translation from the DOE's T & I Unit for languages that our school staff does not speak. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Curriculum Night September Student Led Conferences November & March IEP Meetings September - June interpretation service(s)? Bilingual staff will provide interpretation services. We will also utilize Language Line to contact parents who speak languages our staff does not speak. Our school will use a DOE vendor to provide translation services to families whose preferred language is not a DOE covered language and no staff member is fluent in the language. Bilingual staff will provide interpretation services. We will also utilize Language Line to contact parents who speak languages our staff does not speak. Furthermore, our school will use a DOE vendor to provide translation services to families whose preferred language is not a DOE covered language and no staff member is fluent in the language. Bilingual staff will provide interpretation. We will also utilize Language Line to contact parents who 9  Restorative Meetings with Families September - June Academic Intervention Meetings with Families September - June speak languages our staff does not speak as well as use a DOE vendor. Bilingual staff will provide interpretation. We will also utilize Language Line to contact parents who speak languages our staff does not speak as well as a DOE vendor. Bilingual staff will provide interpretation services. We will also utilize Language Line to contact parents who speak languages our staff does not speak as well as use a DOE vendor. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. BCS utilizes robocall in English, Spanish, Arabic, French, French Haitian-Creole, Cantonese and Mandarin to reach limited-English-proficient families. Our staff utilizes Language Line to contact parents who speak languages our staff does not speak. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. At our weekly staff meetings, staff members are made aware of how to use translation services and over the phone interpretation services. Each staff member receives a Translation and Interpretation Brochure, a Language ID Guide and a Language Palm Card. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Our Language Access Coordinators will create an environment in which parents are made aware of and understand how to access language assistance services. Our Language Access Coordinators will also provide direct outreach to parents about their rights to language assistance services. Our welcome poster is posted at the main entrance to our school and there are also signs at the main entrance regarding visitor access in covered languages to ensure that parents are not prevented from reaching the main office due to language barriers. At the beginning of the school year, each BCS family receives a copy of The Parents Guide to Language Access which reminds parents of their right to 0  obtain interpretation and translation services. As previously stated, all brochures, flyers and letters are shared with parents in their preferred language. Furthermore, at every parent engagement event, our large bilingual school staff will translate in the preferred language of the parents. Our staff will also utilize Language Line at all parent engagement events to communicate with parents who speak languages our staff does not speak. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our parents surveys, translated into Spanish, Chinese, French, French Haitian-Creole and Arabic, help us gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services. Furthermore, our school will utilize the DOE's T & I Unit to translate surveys our staff does not speak. Our Language Access Coordinators work together to ensure that all parental voices are heard, including limited-English- proficient parents. Based on parental feedback, our school has recently reached out to NYCDOE@the bigword.com to inquire about translating IEPs. Furthermore, our school has purchased translation tools and paid bilingual staff per session to expedite our translation needs. 1 
