2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 14K454 School Name: GREEN SCHOOL: AN ACADEMY FOR ENVIRONMENTAL CAREERS Principal: CARA TAIT 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: 331400011454 9-12 223 Graham Ave 718-599-1207 Section 1: School Information Page School Information WilliamsburgHigh School for Art and Technology School Number (DBN): 14K454 Phone Number: 718-387-7945 Fax: Cara Tait CTait2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 14 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Cara Tait Kyle Van Nort Luz Rosario Cara Tait Stephanie Vega Chynna Rios CarringtonDantzler Toby Levine District Information Karen Watts Superintendent: 1396 Broadway Brooklyn, NY 11221 KWatts@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 455-4635 Phone Number: Fax: 7184554684 Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Brooklyn North FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Bernadette Fitzgerald Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street BFitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (347) 225-5119 Phone Number: 718 935-2382 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Cara Tait-Fanor Kyle Van Nort Luz Rosario Stephanie Vega CarringtonDantzler MalikCarrington Nekisha Smith Justin Soderholm *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Teacher Member/Parent 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) MirnaBierto Edward Minier Member/Parent Member/Student Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  1. What is your school’s mission statement? Williamsburg HS for Art and Tech Graduate Promise Section 4: SCEP Overview We develop graduates that are bold and courageous; passionate and compassionate. They are savvy and purposeful. They have developed skills, expanded their knowledge, and confidently engage with others to push boundaries and question assumptions. With love and joy, they question the world as we know it. We are committed to developing graduates that will invent the new normal. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. WHSAT was founded on the belief that authentic learning opportunities include opportunities for students to collaborate with one another, and also connect to the world as a whole. Both students and staff engage in collaborative inquiry opportunities to improve learning. We believe that in order for students to be responsible 21st century citizens, students must have deep understanding of art and culture, as well as technology. We have over 300 students, the vast majority qualifying for free or reduced lunch. Over 30% of our students are English Language Learners, and 25% are students with disabilities. Community School Partnership - Our partnership with St Nicks Alliance provides students and their families with support in a variety of ways, including mental health accommodations, immigration and legal assistance, and housing and job placement. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Green School Special Populations WHSAT serves a diverse population. 34% of our population are English Language Learners, with the vast majority as newcomer ELLs, where we are their first United States High School experience. Also, 24% are Special Education students. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Framework for Great Schools Improvements When looking at the improvements that were made, we continued to improve on our rigorous instruction, moving from a Developing to Proficient in 1.2 Teacher Pedagogy and from Proficient to Well Developed in Quality Review Indicator 1.1 Rigorous and Coherent Curriculum. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  We also made significant gains in teacher collaboration, moving from Proficient to Well Developed in our teacher teams category of the rubric. Also, on this year’s Frameworks Report, we earned an “excellent” under the sections of School Leadership and narrowly missed "excellent" for Trust. We have been working on continuing to develop our culture of collaboration among teachers and also continue to work to increase our academic rigor in our lesson design. This year, we will continue to focus on Rigorous Instruction 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 14K454 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 269 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 4 4 1 4 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 3 2 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 78.0% % Attendance Rate 76.6% % Reduced Lunch 29.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 66.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.66 4% 12% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 53% 34% 60.7% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A YES N/A N/A No N/A 93 81 4 83.5% 2.2% 20.4% 27.1% 2.2% 1.5% 2 20% 5.6 N/A N/A 66% 49% 71.7% 2% N/A Yes No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  Economically Disadvantaged YES ALL STUDENTS YES 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In preparation for the CEP we looked at the following data points: - Scholastic Data including course pass rates - Regents pass rates for the last two years - Quality Review feedback for the last two years - School Quality Guide for the last two years Strengths - Improvements in teacher pedagogy and our curriculum as indicated by our performance on our last Quality Review, as well as feedback from members of the Superintendent's Team. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  - Improved graduation rate for the 2017-2018 cohort - Increased rigorous course offerings through the AP Expansion and College Now partnership Needs - Increase number of students leaving considered "college ready" as indicated by School Quality Guide - Increase regents pass rates, particularly around Algebra, as well as ELA, particularly for ELL students The data that was used in our needs assessment to conclude our focus areas were the Regents Item Analysis and pass rates, as well as the school scholastic data. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, 80% of the student population in each cohort will be on track for graduation as measured by the following: 9th grade - 2 Regents exams completed 10th grade - 4 Regents exams completed 11th grade - 5 Regents exams completed * We define regents exams as any of those included as graduation standards, including the LOTE exam, as well as CDOS credential 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Learning Partners: To build a partnership with a similar setting school in order to enhance student enrichment through school visits, model teaching and increased cooperative planning. This will be an opportunity to continue to develop new ideas, incentives and interactions that will grow our learning environment. The Learning Partners program includes cycles of learning where teachers use data to make clear instructional goals for our school. This year we will focus on designing differentiated learning experiences using the Japanese lesson study model based on assessment loops Subject Team: Within discipline and interdisciplinary teams there will be shared ideas, projects and data analysis in order to improve student test scores, skills and attendance through engagement. Teachers in critical areas are teaching parallel schedules in order to maximize co-planning opportunities Diagnostic and Periodic Assessment Loop: A calendar based around our trimester schedule will unify the school's time period in which diagnostics, midterms and finals will be administered and based on developing the same skills throughout the year. As we work to develop action plans, based on the skill needs identified we will ensure that during all Parent Teacher conferences, and parent meetings, we are supporting the expansion of understanding of the CCLS with our families. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All teacher staff August 2018 – June 2019 Administration, Model Teachers and Department Leaders All teacher staff August 2018 – June 2018 Administration and Department Leaders All teacher staff Date August 2018 – June 2019 Administration and Department Leaders Reduced class sizes and small group pull out in targeted subject areas: Based on the data, we have added an additional small group pull out option to the Circular Six menu, so that we can provided targeted instructional opportunities. We have shifted our programming in order to provide these opportunities for students. Targeted sub-groups including ELLs and students who have failed the Global exam at least once. August 2018 – June 2019 Administration and small group instruction team 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We do a curriculum night at the start of the school year, as well as during student led conferences. Additionally, in conjunction with our lead teachers and CBO partnership, we will provide workshops including increasing understanding of our mastery-based grading system, as well as data. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Department Leader Positions: To help ensure the work we are doing is meaningful, we will have biweekly meetings with department heads that will be held after school. As a result of our involvement in the Learning Partner's Plus program we will have 3 model teacher positions. They will be responsible for the success of our work and our bridge for the work produced with other schools. Professional Development time will be used for biweekly meetings on lesson study and our 360 model in interdisciplinary teams. Through our Community School's presence we are now allowed to have advisory also be a part of their responsibilities in order for our teachers to have additional planning time for lesson studies and professional development. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Every trimester, teachers will conduct two lesson study observations. During observations they will collect evidence on student skills related to reading comprehension through appropriate evidence, structure and analysis. Following the observations, they will examine internal assessments to see if there is improvement. At the end of every trimester, they will disseminate their findings in whole staff lesson study gallery walks. January Regents: At this point, all staff will do a thorough item analysis and check that there is an overall increase in the multiple choice section of the Common Core English Regents and base scores of the argumentative writing. We will also analyze the Document Based Questions from both history exams for an increase in students' reading comprehension. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  March 2019 marks the end of the 2 nd trimester and at this point the Principal and Assistant Principal will do a review of teacher's unit plans to ensure all classes have incorporated meaningful and purposeful instruction aligned with school goals and expectations. We hope to see alignment to our school's goals and expectations in at least 80% of unit plans by March. This will act as the mid-point benchmark. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use internally created assessments based on past regents exams and the CCLS. Additionally, we are tracking credit accumulation scholastic data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? In preparation for the CEP we looked at the following data points: - Attendance data for the last two years - Learning Environment survey - Framework for Greater Schools Report - OORS Data - Quality Review - Danielson data 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  Strengths - Over the last three years we have moved away from suspensions and toward a Restorative Justice approach. As a result, we have seen a consistent decrease in Level 3 and Level 4 infractions according to our OORS data. - Our parents and students both indicate that they are supported by staff members - Students reported that they feel safe inside of our school - College and career readiness credit has been awarded for our ELA proficiency - Increased student leadership opportunities including Student Ambassadors and Peer mentors that support the freshmen classes through advisory - Students reflect on their progress and continue to grow Needs - An increase in student ownership over their own learning - Increased long term planning towards college and career readiness The data that we used to support these needs were specific answers from the Learning Environment survey, as well as the percentage of students leaving college and career ready, and with clear post secondary plans according to our Quality Guide. This year, we are committed to increasing the students who leave our institution with defined post secondary plans. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In order to increase college and career readiness and to continue to challenge our learners, by June of 2019, 80% of our students will have completed at least one student-led parent teacher conference with a clear focus on development on post secondary readiness and incorporating our new standard based grading policy. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All staff, regardless of the position, have been updated and have an understanding of the new grading policy in order to best support students and families. All staff members Revising of student led conference documents to reflect the grading policy shifts, so that students and families can truly dialogue All Staff Members Students and families introduced to the grading policy at the start of the school year (utilizing Back to School night, New Student Orientation and the first weeks of September) students and families Student Led conferences and include student assessment of their own progress, post secondary plans and well as action steps that students have planned for the upcoming trimester. Students and parents with the support of their advisors June 2018- September 2018 August-September of 2018 June 2018-September 2018 November and March of 2019 administration and lead teachers Members of the school based College Access for All Team administration, lead teachers, and Family Advocate Staff members in their roles of advisors 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Through funding with the College Access for All Pilot, our school is partnering with the organization CARA to improve the way that we are supporting students and families with college and career planning in grades 9-11. These conferences will not only be an opportunity to reflect on student performance, but also to begin planning for the future with families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Partnership with St Nicks Alliance will support our students in the development of their portfolios (grant funding) - Grade Team leaders that will support the coordination and implementation of student led conferences - Additional guidance counselor that will support the coordination and implementation of student led conferences 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  - Funding through the College Access For All funding Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. - We will compare November’s parent conference attendance to that of last years to see if there is increased participation in the number of parents who attended - We will compare the scholastic data of students who complete their conferences with those who do not. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will be reviewing attendance during parent teacher conferences and internal surveys. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by SOP(s) Addressed x X X X using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In preparation for the EP we looked at the following data points: - Trends in Danielson Data - Quality Review Feedback - Internal Teacher Reflections - Learning Environment Survey Strengths This year, WHSAT increased teacher collaboration through school wide incorporation of Lesson study cycles, and partnership with additional schools through the Learning Partners Program. We also have several staff members that have served as model teachers and have provided their classrooms as labs for innovation and exploration around best practices. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  Needs While we now have shared practices, as we took a deeper dive at the data, we saw that there were several subgroups that we continue to struggle with, particularly our Black girls and Latino males. We want to use the teacher teams as the space to begin to develop solutions that best support the increased achievement. This year, we are committed to directly connecting our lesson study cycles, to our school's focus around racial equity. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, 100% of our teachers will have engaged in a collaborative Lesson Study Cycle and revised their unit plans to include instruction in persuasive writing and using textual or data driven evidence to support their claim, and both teachers and student will be able to speak to shifts made pedagogically. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff)  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  In August, all who have not yet attended, will attend a summer PD on persuasive writing using textual or data driven evidence to support their claim. During the school year, teachers in each department will engage in three lesson study cycles. These cycles focus on one teacher in the department and involve teachers identifying the skill they are focused on, analyzing student work, commonly planning 2 lessons, observing and debriefing the lessons, and revising unit plans based on lessons learned. At the end of each trimester, teachers will engage in a consultancy protocol to present the strategies their departments tried and receive feedback from other departments. All Teachers August 2018 Principal, Assistant Principal, Department Heads Administration and department heads All Teachers September 2018 through June 2019 Model Teachers September 2018- June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Model Teachers Throughout the school year, students are providing feedback to the teachers in regards to the implementation of the lessons Students NA 3b – Parent and Family Engagement NA How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be informed of the work of the Learning Partners as well a progress during PA Meetings Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Model teachers through the Learning Partners Program - Department Heads 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  - Per session for planning time Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. - We hold biweekly meetings with department heads to analyze the effectiveness of this work. - We give out surveys to teachers at the end of each year to evaluate the success of Lesson Study. - During our observations of teachers, we continually look for ways they are implementing these strategies in their work. - Teachers give internal assessments at least twice a term to see if the strategies they are trying are successful. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We do whole staff review sessions at the trimester level utilizing internal survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Successes: ● One of the major successes of our school in Effective School Leadership is the culture of inclusive leadership. In We have created several avenues to ensure that various constituents have input in the school decision making process. We have monthly consultation committee meetings made up of counselors, teachers, and the Community Schools Liaison that brings issues up to leadership and brainstorms solutions. We have weekly full staff meetings to ensure the cabinet hears from a variety of staff voices. There is a student leadership that regularly presents ideas to administration. In addition, the principal and assistant principal meet biweekly with department heads to hear about academic concerns. Administration meets once a week to review upcoming issues, plan staff meetings, and meet about students. These structures have created a feeling of shared responsibility and ownership over the school. This is evident in our Framework for Great Schools Report of 2014, where we received a “Excellent” in the category of School Leadership, as well as a Proficient in this category on the Quality Review. Needs: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  One core need of the school is create a career ladder for teachers in this school. At this point we have four department heads, however, we have many teachers who have been here for several years and we want to create more opportunity for leadership for these teachers. Next year, we will have 3 model teacher positions through the Learning Partner’s Plus Program. Our goal is for these model teachers to adopt a learning stance, effectively host school visits, articulate our schools teaching philosophy to other educators and share their best practices with their peers at other schools. Additionally as a PROSE school, the union has completed a PROSE ballot, where teachers will create and coordinate committees based on identified needs of the school. These committees will coordinate innovative plans around student intervention. This year we will continue to diversify the types of leadership opportunities and ensure that multiple stakeholders included. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, 75% of our teachers will have hosted a teacher led professional development opportunity including a staff led pd or school visits where they have shared best practices with other schools, collected materials and shared them with visiting teachers. We will see evidence of shared practices being tried in at least 85% of teachers, as evidenced through observations. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Over the summer, we will hold a retreat to train our model teachers and build relationships with our partner schools to foster this work. Model teachers July and August Learning Partners and Administration “Learning Walks” where lead teachers classrooms are showcasing best practices aligned to the Green School’s instructional focus Model teachers and teacher staff Throughout the school year Model teachers and administration Teacher led pd based on highlighted teacher strengths and best practices Teachers will share their findings at PA meetings throughout the year Teaching staff Families Throughout the year Teachers and administration Throughout the year Teachers and administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will share their findings at PA meetings throughout the year and during our end of year Community Forum Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Per Session - Model Teachers through the Learning Partners Program - Department Heads - Funding for Instructional Coach Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. - We hold biweekly meetings with department heads to analyze the effectiveness of this work. - We give out surveys to teachers at the end of each year to evaluate how they felt about the shared leadership. We would like to see improvement in teacher reported feedback in at least two domains. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher designed professional development plans as well as ADVANCE data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In preparation for the CEP we looked at the following data points: - Learning Environment survey - Framework for Greater Schools Report - Focus Group Feedback from CBO Strengths - Our parents and students both indicate that they are supported by staff members - We have built several partnerships including the in-house clinic through Woodhull Hospital, as well as Interborough Counseling Services 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  - Community Partnership Fair that provided families with access to resources - We began an evening ESL class for parents based on the needs indicated by families Needs - A clear understanding of the resources that our families need - On-going opportunities to provide families with these services Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In order to ensure that our programming supports the needs of our families, in May of 2019 we will host a Community Forum that 80% of families attend and will include at least five community resources that our parents have indicated that they need. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Parent Survey conducted to best capture needs Parents September Community Schools and Guidance Team Launch of Family Resource Center Parents October Surveys to assess success of resource team Parents March Work Plan created as a part of the community school expectations is revised and shifted as need be Parents throughout the year Community Schools Team Community Schools Team Community Schools team and administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Families will continue to indicate their needs so that we can improve our family center throughout the school year Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. This is completely funded by the Community Schools Grant, which is why we selected "other" Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  Surveys for families throughout the school year. The first survey will be taken at parent teacher conferences in November in order to ensure that the resource center aligns to the needs. The center will be ready for use with a launch at the end of February/first week of March. We will track usage per month with homes of at least 25-30 families using the resources (both in person or online) between March and April, and ending the year with at about 100 families using/perusing resources (either online on in person). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance data from after school family sessions, and visits to the family resource center Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Low 8 th grade scores and internal teacher assessments, history of failing classes. Low 8 th grade scores and Regents scores in Mathematics, internal teacher assessments, and history of failing classes. Low 8 th grade scores internal teacher assessments, and low Regents scores. Low 8 th grade scores, internal teacher assessments, and low Regents scores. Based on interviews and assessment of student needs during one-on-one conversations and advisory. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group and one-on-one pullout During the school day, after school. Small group and one-on-one pullout During the school day, after school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Explicit instruction in learning strategies and repeated readings. Explicit instruction in mathematical habits of mind and remedial mathematic skills instruction. Explicit instruction in learning strategies Small group and one-on-one pullout During the school day, after school. Explicit instruction in learning strategies Small group and one-on-one pullout During the school day, after school. Group and one-on-one During the school day, after school. One-to-one socio-emotional supportive counseling using Motivational interview strategies 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 30 students We provide students with initial school supplies, and guidance counselors are provided students with the names of these students, and provide additional check ins with these students for support. We also provide expanded learning opportunities after school for our students. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). We are a title i school 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  We are a title i school 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. We are a title i school 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. In order to create interesting, engaging lessons for students that make them want to attend school, we recognize the need to have highly qualified teachers at Green. We have organized a hiring committee. This committee has hosted several hiring events and also requires our candidates to go through a rigorous hiring process. We have held open houses when we invite prospective teachers to tour the school. These are student run and give candidates a sense of our students and school community. Furthermore, all candidates have presented mini-lessons to our students afterschool and participated in a roundtable reflection on their lessons. Through these processes we are ensuring we have high quality teachers committed to improving their instructional practices. Once teachers are hired, we host a summer PD and then monthly meetings for new teachers. We are creating an internally funded model teacher position who will be working intensely with new teachers throughout the school year around classroom management and planning. We also structure our program to ensure new teachers can co-teach at least one class. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). We provide professional development to our teachers through our lesson study format. Teachers collaboratively examine student work, create lessons, teach, analyze work again, refine their lessons, and engage in collaborative processes to improve teaching. We also have a weekly staff meeting where we discuss youth development principles and issues pertinent to the school. Every summer, we pay teachers to come in and do additional training around lesson planning. Finally, the principal and assistant principal purposefully divide teachers to provide supervision aligned to the lesson study. This work involves not only observations, but planning sessions, examination of student data etc. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Our school is fully committed to empowering teachers in using and selecting multiple assessment measures. Since opening, our school has designed our own assessments, using a teacher and department created outcome-based grading system and teacher designed assessments. Teachers regularly review their outcome rubrics and student work in their departments to ensure the skills they are assessing are the appropriate level. After each Regents, departments conduct an item analysis and use this analysis to revise their outcomes and assessments. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 179,940 19,979 0 0 12,366 0 2,204,806 Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) X X X X X X X Section 5A, 5B, 5C. 5A. 5B n/a n/a 5A, 5B. 5C, 5D. 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D. 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41   Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG or SIF funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 14K454, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. [Williamsburg High School for Art and Technology] will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45 School-Parent Compact (SPC)  School-Parent Compact (SPC) 14K454 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? Our Community School team is directly providing resources and services that will increase the college and career readiness of our students. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, as a result of the work done in conjunction with our CBO, 75% of Cohort U will graduate with the CDOS credential. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? Our success mentors, attendance team and after school activities are all designed to support students and families with designing reasonable and deliberate goals, aligned to their post-secondary plans. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership St Nicks Alliance Target Population Grades 10-12 St Nicks alliance Grade 9 Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal Provides college preparation course as well as a Career Exploration course Increased after school programming in order to reguce chronic absenteeism. By June of 2019, as a result of the work done in conjunction with our CBO, 75% of Cohort U will graduate with the CDOS credential. By June of 2019, 85% of students will not fall into the at risk attendance category. Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Team meetings, CA4A funding, scheduled trips and instructional time for career exploration. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. 2. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  3. 4. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. Our community school team members are embedded into our curriculum, community and decision making. All of our weekly meetings, including staff PD, attendance meetings, curriculum meetings, committees including College Access for All, Racial Equity Expansion and student events all are a combination of CS and school staff. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students Please see above Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. Scheduling of meetings in order to ensure inclusion of multiple stakeholders Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. All of the work of this year is in continuation with the work began in the previous school year. All goals began September of 2018 and will go until June of 2019. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: In order to best support our English language learners, we are providing direct instruction both before school and after school. The rational for our programming is to provide tailored experiences for our diverse ELLs. On Mondays and Fridays, our bilingual math teacher hosts math programming for our newly arrived ELLs in grades 9-12. This goes from 7:45-8:45am. The program began on Monday, September 19th and will run for a total of 60 sessions, ending in May. After school on Thursdays, one of our ESL teachers hosts an after school program that is focused on writing in English. This program is geared to our students scoring transitional or above, in grades 10-12. This program began on Thursday, September 22nd and meets from 3:15-4:15 weekly. It will run for a total of 30 sessions, ending in May. We use the curriculum that we have in house, that is at no cost. The teachers are using supplemental materials from the Edge Curriculum for ESL, and the math teacher supports students with Delta Math, and also provides students with the technology to go on Algebra Nation. Also meeting on Thursdays, separately is an ESL afterschool program specifically for our Entering and Emerging students. Imeets during the same time frame. This program began on Thursday, September 22nd and meets from 3:15-4:15 weekly. It will run for a total of 30 sessions, ending in May. This program focuses primarily on conversational Spanish. Both of our ESL classes that meet after school are using supplementary materials from the Edge curriculum Teachers have sign in sheets that are submitted with their per-session forms, and all attendance is kept on filed at the school. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Our entire staff has expressed a desire to better service our ELLs. Our ELLs have struggled on regent exams. We hope that with increased PD, all staff members can incorporate strategies to increase student achievement. As a staff we are working on increasing student engagement through accountable talk and student centered classrooms. We also believe that through increased staff professional development, we will see gains in student achievement. We are paying particular attention to the volume and quality of student writing. 1. As a part of the Learning Partners Program, we are providing teachers with support adapted from the work that we completed previously with ReDesign Consultants. The consultant comes bi-weekly, and provides individual coaching support to our Transitional Bilingual team. This targeted work is around the use of language, both English and native, in order to support students. The whole school professional development cycle mirrors the work done with ReDesign focused around the SIOP model. The staff meetings for are the third Wednesday of each month, resulting in 8 sessions. 2. Additionally, as a part of Learning Partners Program, we are implementing Japanese Lesson study. This provides teachers with an opportunity to collaborate on lesson design, and conduct intervisitations. Lesson study goes through 3 cycles. The first cycle is from September to December, the second, going from January to March, and the final cycle going from April to June. Our school tracks all agendas and notes digitally through our online platform on Google Docs. All of the professional development provided to the staff is currently at no cost for the current school year. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities  how parents will be notified of these activities Begin description here: In order to foster a sense of community, we truly try to make an effort to make sure that parents are welcomed into the community from the start. We hope that through activities that are accessible to all, families will see our school as a resource for learning and services. None of the programming provided for parents is using Title III funding. 1. Prior to the school year started, because the ESL teachers reached out and introduced themselves to the parents. 2. We work with Ramapo to complete a workshop series around raising a teenager. This cost is covered from the work with our Community School team. The schedule for the sessions are that they meet on the 3rd Thursday of the month, resulting in 10 for the year. All sessions begin at 5pm. The workshops are all provided by our bilingual guidance counselor. Tentative schedule of topics include: September - Graduation Requirements October - Understanding social media November - College Access/The College Process December - Celebrating your students achievement January - Preparing for the Regents February - Using the city as a classroom March - Celebrating your students achievement/asking the right questions April - Preparing for summer - What is your student doing this summer May - Preparing for Regents June - Family Celebration All agendas and notes are collected digitally through our partnership with St Nicks Alliance. Parents are notified through email, backpack letters and phone reminders. All sign in sheets are kept on record. We are creating a family bilingual library from which parents and students are encourages to borrow the same books to read and discuss at home. 3. This year, the College Counselor is hosting a special Financial Aid night for parents of ELL students in October specifically for students who may not be here legally or may need additional 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities support with the FASFA process. Translation and interpretation services are provided to parents during this session. 4. With the support of our Community Partner, St Nicks Alliance and the Office of Adult Eduacation , we have an ESL class for adults. This class will meet on Tuesday/Wednesday/Thursday evenings on the weekly basis. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 14 School Name The Green School Borough Brooklyn School Number 454 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Cara Tait Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Gina Sclafani Teacher/Subject Area Tercido Batista Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent type here Assistant Principal Nathan Affield Coach type here School Counselor Amarilis Aguerta Parent Stephanie Vega Parent Coordinator type here Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 2 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 264 Total number of ELLs 86 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 32.58% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 3 4 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 1 10 11 12 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 Tot # 4 0 0 0 0 0 4 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? In addition to the NYSITELL, we use teacher generated assessments in order to assess literacy skills. Through this data we are able to see who might benefit from additional testing for SIFE supports, or who may need literacy support. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We define success through regents pass rates, analysis of NYSESLAT progress and now benchmarks set through use of the AMAO. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The majority of our students are coming to us far below grade level in their native language and this results in a continued to progress on the NYSESLAT. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. 1 . Students in freestanding ENL travel in heterogenous groups. Because the vast majority of our students participate in our TBE-Spanish program, students in Freestanding ENL are programmed individually to meet their ENL mandates as per CR 154.2 as well as other needs such as less frequent language support (Bengali or Arabic), special education mandates or accelerated classes such as Advanced Placement or advanced math and science courses. b. TBE program. If applicable. TBE students are programmed in homogenous groups based on NYSESLAT/NYSITELL identified proficiency level and subgrouped based on scores within their assigned level. c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  Entering- and emerging-level students take 2 - 58 minute periods of ENL instruction daily for a total of 580 minutes per week. Students identified as transitioning, expanding or commanding all receive one daily ENL course in addition to one 58-minute period of ELA. In addition, we offer mathematics, Global History, US History and science courses taught by bilingual teachers. Transitioning and expanding students also take an integrated science course co-taught by a licensed science teacher and licensed ENL instructor. All students in our TBE Spanish program take one period of Native Language Arts instruction per day. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In our transitional bilingual program, we foster language development through a balanced used of native language and language objectives. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students take the Spanish LAB exam within 10 days of their arrival at the Green School. At the end of the year, they take the NLA exam provided by the DOE BAID. Throughout the year, frequent observations are made to ensure progress in lieu of standard tests, however the school uses uniform final exams for each trimester, taken by all students on a digital platform that is then analyzed by administration, inquiry and subject teams to identify patterns and move student achievement. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Students identified as SIFE will be arranged in distinct sections, that mix with all students throughout the day, but are also given specific and targeted small-group instructional periods which utilize SIFE resources produced and distributed from NYC DOE sources, but also integrate materials to reflect the broad range of academic needs typical of SIFE students. b. Newcomer students are arranged into specific sections and welcomed to the school community through parent meetings, camping trips and guidance intervention specific to their individual needs. Classes specific to newcomer students begin with strong foundations in the home language before branching out into the necessary English language skills the students will need to be successful in future academic coursework outside of their home language. c. Developing ELLs need as much immersion in English as programmatically possible. We have used strategies including integration into all-English speaking content courses with the support of an ENL licensed instructor if schedules and mandated services permit. Students are expected to use English in class, but provided home language supports when necessary. d. Long term ELLs receive ENL instructional time based on their levels in conjunction with CR 154.2. Classes are differentiated with access to home language-speaking paraprofessionals or content teachers with materials available in both languages and access to a variety of content resources including leveled readings from online sources such as Newsela.com and print materials such as native laguage dictionaries and glossaries. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  e. Former ELLs work with licensed ENL instructors and are given continued servicing as per CR 154.2. We strive to support these students while maximizing their access to all of the rich academic options at the Green School including AP courses, College Now classes at CUNY-City Tech, high-level math and science coursework and our teaching assistants program, where they often serve as in-class resources for newcomers and developing ELLs. When needed, our ELL instructional team works to meet their needs with a variety of content resources including leveled readings from online sources such as Newsela.com and print materials such as native laguage dictionaries and glossaries. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Because of our increasing population of students identified with the classification ELL-SWDs, we have a series of courses taught by bilingual and Special education dual-certified instructors. In addition, we’re utilizing paraprofessional at a greater rate to work one-on-one or in small groups with ELL-SWDs, by integrating both paras and students into Integrated Co-Teacher settings to offer the least restrictive environment. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Although we are a very small school we are fortunate to have a multi-skilled and mostly dual-licensed staff. With bilingual staff in all content areas, paraprofessionals who speak all languages seen in our student body and Special education instructors who speak the language of our most common newcomers, we have provided a series of content courses meeting the needs of students with mandated services in both ENL and IEP spheres. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. In mathematics, newcomer students were given two periods a day of Algebra instruction with a native speaker to assist in remediation of some of the many numeracy issues arriving in our student body. Our bilingual Global History teacher pushes into our advisory classes twice a week to work with small groups while our bilingual Guidance Counselor - who runs the advisory - conferences individually with students regarding their academic progress and social emotional needs. After school, tutoring is available from content teachers in home language and English. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We want to give ELL students more access and involvement in the community, namely through an internet bookshare and reading club with our local elementary school. Students will write e-books for children which will be shared with the local school digitally. In addition, they are part of a reader’s club, reading books to local elementary students to give back to the community while engaging their own language skills. One teacher is planning to create a journalism strand specific to ELL students, bringing together literacy, current events, critical thinking and digital fluency by writing and publishing an updated website with news relevant to ELL students across the city. Another project will link our schools computer science classes with ELL instruction by training an ENL licensed teacher at the Flatiron School to bring career and technical instruction targeted at the ENL students. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Our ENL services are still in a real expansion phase as our population has grown exponentially in the last three years and continues to expand. Due to this trend, there are no programs we plan to abandon at this time. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. One example of ELLs afforded all afterschool activities is the recent addition of our bilingual Guidance Counselor to the theater arts team. Due to an overwhelming demand from ELL students, this year’s theater production will be The Heights a musical performed in both English and Spanish. Another example is our most recent heads of student government - both current ELL students at the time of their election - who campaigned in both English and Spanish. All afterschool event announcements are in both languages and office staff is entirely bilingual, disseminating information regarding events and activities effectively to all student and families. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. ELL content and ENL instruction uses a wide variety of sources including leveled texts from newsela.com, an iTunes University course built in-house by an ENL teacher that allows students to improve their English and their own pace with classroom support. Newcomers use the Milestones text and intermediate ELLs use Scholastic magazine texts. All ELLs access Continental Press leveled-content readers as test preparatory materials. Other electronic resources used include Duolingo and Rosetta Stone - which students are given access to for out-of-school purposes. iPads are used by all ELL students for their language resources and other web-based supports. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language instruction is primarily in Native Language Arts classes, although since the school employs native language teachers in all content areas - who recognize the important part bi-literacy plays in academic success regardless of the discipline - students practice writing, reading and speaking their home language throughout the school day. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Students progress through graduation requirements to match their scheduled classes with their appropriate age and grade level. Home country transcripts are carefully analyzed by the guidance team and appropriate credits from their former schools are added to transcripts. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? ELL content and ENL instruction uses a wide variety of sources including leveled texts from newsela.com, an iTunes University course built in-house by an ENL teacher that allows students to improve their English and their own pace with classroom support. Newcomers use the Milestones text and intermediate ELLs use Scholastic magazine texts. All ELLs access Continental Press leveled-content readers as test preparatory materials. Other electronic resources used include Duolingo and Rosetta Stone - which students are given access to for out-of-school purposes. iPads are used by all ELL students for their language resources and other web-based supports. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We employ a bilingual Guidance Counselor who also serves as advisor to all ELL students, meeting twice a week to provide socio-emotional support for students in geographic and linguistic transition. Through our Community School partnership, we are also able to work with two bilingual parent success mentors, who engage ELL parents and encourage their direct activity with the school community. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? ELL students have taken French instruction and are offered English language electives including literature and creative writing instruction. They hone language arts skills through our peer mediation programs and serve as teacher assistants and peer leaders in classes taught both in English and Spanish. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? This year's professional development is focused on supporting student literacy through text based accountable talk. This is an opportunity to support all learners, particularly our ELLs in language acquisition. This year the school has patterned with ReDesign, a consultant organization that is supporting our incorporation of literacy strategies and SIOP model. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Staff members have an opportunity to meet as a grade team to discuss issues that students are having and to come up with action plans. The students also have advisory that is taught by the bilingual guidance counselor. Advisory is designed to support young people in their transition to high school, and for some of our ELLs, in order to support them in the transition to this country. The professional planning time around incorporation the ReDesign model supports the intergration of the SIOP model and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  accountable talk strategies that are geared to support English Language Learners. Agendas for our PDs are kept on file. Additionally, our teachers have been taking advantage of professional development offerings coming out of the borough office, as well as the Office of English Language Learners. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The ELL team hosts a parent night in the fall and the spring in order to discuss the goals of the program as well as how parents can support their students at home. Records are kept on file. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. he parents are all invited to be a part of the Parent Association. We also strive to make sure that we have an ELL parent as an active participant on the PA to ensure their needs are being addressed. At the start of the school year, a parent involvement survey was sent home to parents where they ranked the types of things that they might like to be a part of including volunteering or workshops that they might want to be a part of. Additionally this year we are going to host two ELL parent potlucks where parents can bring food and meet and mingle with one another. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Cara Tait, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 14K454 School Name: The Green School Superintendent: Lashawn Robinso The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The Green School is small learning community that values communication with families. The amount of written and oral communication is limited enough that we have a concept of the language needs of our audience for each communication. It is the expectation that all written communication is translated into the necessary home languages and that oral communication is provided by professionals fluent in a family’s home language. Administration, office staff, the Parent Coordinator and Grade Level Teams (GLTs)—including the ELL teachers—review data from ATS, the Home Language Survey, Advisory, classroom observations and informal conversations to determine the language needs of our families. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language The primary alternative language for our parents is Spanish. We also have a small population of parents who prefer Arabic. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Our Family Handbook, information about parent teacher conferences and PA meetings, progress reports, letters regarding particular student needs (conferences, suspension hearings) and any letters sent home from administration 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? We have one on one conferences with parents of students who may be struggling. We also have parent teacher conferences, and phone calls that are made home to parents. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) All of the documents that need to be posted are currently posted in the school. The Parents Bill of Rights and guide to language access were included in our parent packet that we give out at the start of the school year. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Through our partnership as a Community School we are gathering feedback through surveys and parent focus groups. We have added questions around accessibility to the survey, to ensure that all families feel welcome and supported. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69 
