 20K490 School Name: FORT HAMILTON HIGH SCHOOL Principal: KAYE HOULIHAN   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information FORT HAMILTON HIGH SCHOOL 332000011490 9-12 School Number (DBN): 20K490 8301 Shore Road, Brooklyn, New York 11209 718.748.1537 Phone Number: 718.836.3955 Fax: Kaye Houlihan khoulih@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Kaye Houlihan Keith Fessel Co-Presidents: Dina Gangemi/ Cathy Joseph Robert Lanaghan LillianShek Kayla Hernandez FarahJaved N/A District Information Geographical District: 20 Richard Cintron Superintendent: 335 Adams Street, Room 504, Brooklyn, NY 11201 Superintendent’s Office Address: rcintro@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718.923.5124 Phone Number: 718.923.5145 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Affinity Group Alexandra Anormaliza FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, NY 11201 Aanorm@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718.935.5618 Phone Number: Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Kaye Houlihan Keith Fessel Dina Gangemi LaiaRothstein LillianShek Kayla Hernandez FarahJaved *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Robert Lanaghan Staff/SLT Chairperson/UFT David Freeland Katherine Sisco Deborah Long Staff/UFT Staff/UFT Staff/UFT   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Angela Matteucci Lambrina Gournelos Cathy Massab Adeline Chung Feder Ken Joseph Parent Parent Parent Parent Parent Parent Parent Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Fort Hamilton High School’s mission is to provide all students with "Excellence in Education." Our students and staff continue to strive to meet the academic challenges of the 21 st century by providing a rigorous environment that includes support for all students. The improvement of teaching and learning is a major goal of the school's plan for enhancing scholastic achievement and student attendance. Our philosophy is that all students are capable of succeeding and realizing their potential in an encouraging and supportive, yet challenging environment. The entire school community is committed to raising standards, supporting extra- and co-curricular activities, applying learning to real life experiences, and preparing all students to be college and career ready to function productively in the post-  secondary world. This is guided by an effective leadership team of principal and assistant principals, and a commitment to building capacity in other staff members to lead and grow. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Fort Hamilton High School is located in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn. It is the largest comprehensive, urban high school in a suburban setting. Fort Hamilton High School holds a prominent place on the shore by the Narrows, between Brooklyn and Staten Island. The school, together with the adjacent athletic field, occupies four square blocks. It was built in Georgian architectural style and is truly the jewel in the crown of Bay Ridge. There are 4,600 students on register for the Fall 2018 semester. Comprised of multi-culturally diverse groups, with students from 85 different countries, our school is referred to as a “mini-United Nations.” Based on the philosophy that all students can succeed, Fort Hamilton High School strives to set the standard for excellence in the NYC public schools. Students are assisted by our guidance staff to find the program that is appropriate for them. An academically competitive and rigorous Honor Academy Program is in place for those students who excel. Our screened vocal, instrumental, dance, and drama programs offer students a rich and rigorous program in the Arts. In addition, we have a Certified CTE Business Program that culminates in Virtual Enterprise, as well as JROTC. Our programs include: College Now, Dramatic Arts, Joffrey Ballet Academy, JROTC, Law Institute, Marching Band and a variety of instrumental and vocal groups, Mock Trial and Moot Court, Peer Mediation, Student Leadership, Tech Squad, Virtual Enterprise, and a swimming facility housed in a $13 million Natatorium that is utilized by the extended Bay Ridge community. Our award-winning publications include: the Anchor literary magazine, the Pilot newspaper, and the Tower yearbook, which are departmental publications in English and the Arts. We have 60+ clubs, including numerous ethnic heritage clubs. All students are strongly encouraged to join at least one of these programs or activities; many of our students belong to several. We have an active Student Organization that promotes a positive school spirit and school tone. It gives support to teams and clubs and participates in the school’s decision-making process. Trust surrounds all aspects of our work and ensures collaboration between students and teachers, teachers and administrators, and families and school. Communication and transparency is at the heart of this trust and we work to have an ongoing dialogue on every level. Fort Hamilton High School’s strategic collaborations and partnerships include: Partnerships: American Ballet Theatre, Bay Ridge Community Council, College of Staten Island, Community Board 10, Kingsborough Community College, Lutheran Medical Center, Maimonides Hospital, Part-time Co-operative Education & Training Opportunities, VA Hospital, VATEA, Carnegie Hall and the Julliard School, Interschool Orchestras, American Composers Orchestra, and the Joffrey Ballet. Colleges: Brooklyn College, College of Staten Island, Kingsborough Community College 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our ELLs, approximately 15.91% of our student population, are frequently entering the United States for the first time in high school. They have to make significant progress to acquire English proficiency and pass the ELA Regents. Interfering with their success is lack of engagement with school in the US. Over 50% of our negative discharges are ELLs and we have a buddy system to help support them, but many share that they need jobs and do not attend school regularly. 0  Our ISS population, 15.93% or our student population, are struggling to find success in an academic environment. We look to engage more parents in how they can assist their child along with help them be aware of the expectations to earn a HS diploma. In addition, we develop transition plans beginning in 9th grade and refine or revise annually. We have three social workers on staff and one FT counselor devoted to counseling, both mandated and at-risk students. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The 2018-2019 Comprehensive Education Plan will focus on administrators, teachers, support staff and parents, working collaboratively to provide students with the tools to effectively meet the benchmarks of the New York State Education Department Performance Standards and Assessments and the mandates of the New York City Department of Education Framework for Great Schools. A continued commitment to the Next Generation Learning Standards brings cohesion to our instructional focus to support students’ literacy skills across the content areas. We have also embraced standards in mathematics and all content areas, and the infusion of guidance lessons to better prepare students for college and career which are major goals of the school. In addition, we have targeted the lowest quartile of 9th graders and block programmed them for a double period of balanced literacy using Ramp-Up strategies and programs such as Wilson, Rewards, and Now We Get It in the ISS (ICT or self-contained) classroom, and three terms of Algebra and Geometry. Tutoring and small group instruction are ongoing efforts to support students in the promotion and graduation of students in the lowest third during their first, second and third years at Fort Hamilton High School. To support our most challenged students in the lowest third, ELLs, students with disabilities, and students struggling in advanced courses, we also offer after-school and Saturday tutoring for ELLs and our higher level math and science courses. We continue to exceed the 90th percentile in daily attendance required by promotional standards and to close 407s (aggregate of 20 absences per term) at the 85th percentile. Our goal is to increase the number of Advanced Regents endorsed diplomas in the class of 2019, increase college and career readiness for the same cohort, and meet and exceed the New York State Performance Standards in the areas of English Language Arts, Mathematics, Science, and Social Studies and to achieve AYP in the areas of English and Mathematics. This will impact our ability to improve the cohort graduation rate while decreasing the drop-out rate, and allow our English Language Learners to achieve significant gains in English language acquisition. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 20K490 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 4582 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 433 418 28 97 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 190 149 39 8 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 71.0% % Attendance Rate 67.2% % Reduced Lunch 14.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.2% 31.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 35.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.01 2% 12% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 80% 77% 70.4% 29.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO NO NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO NO NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YES YES No N/A 448 501 1 18 89.9% 4.0% 14.4% 3.8% 27.1% 2.0% 26 21% 7 N/A N/A 82% 81% 80.2% 32% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES NO N/A NO NO YSH NO N/A NO NO YES YES N/A YES YES 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. After reviewing our Annual State School Report Card and conducting our needs assessment, we found that Economically Disadvantaged, Hispanic, LEP and SWD students underperformed all other subgroups. As a result, we will continue to make these groups a priority.   Available student achievement on the Grade 8 Mathematics exam for incoming students in September 2018 indicated that approximately 48% of students with 8th grade NYSED scores from our feeder schools scored at levels 1-2. This is consistent with the previous year. NYSED benchmarks indicated that students scoring at levels 3-4 are on grade level. As a school requiring academic progress, we continue to monitor student achievement and use these assessments as a baseline. Students who enter 9th grade below grade level are placed on a three-term math sequence with the opportunity to demonstrate mastery on the Regents after two terms and then move onto the next course in the math sequence. This enables students to engage in the Algebra 2 curriculum, which will prepare them to be college ready. For the 2018 Cohort, the percentage of students meeting the graduation requirement for a math exam at the end of August was 86%. This represents an increase of 2% from the 2017 Cohort. The students meeting the benchmark for College Readiness increased from the 2017 Cohort (63%) to the 2018 Cohort (70%).  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Students will demonstrate progress towards meeting the graduation requirement on a Math Regents with an 86% passing rate for Cohort 2019 by August 2019. Meeting this goal includes students with a qualifying score. The goal for Cohort 2019 is consistent with the final passing rate for Cohort 2018 of 86% that includes students with a qualifying score. We will continue to focus on increasing the passing rate for both English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Monitor student progress, each marking period, via Datacation and New Visions Data Portal to assess the need for AIS. Create additional small group instruction and tutoring opportunities as needed. 09/2018 to 06/2019 Economically Disadvantaged, Hispanic, LEP and SWD students. Focus on vocabulary, writing, and mathematical skills for free-response questions. In addition to careful integration of the NYS curriculum, we will differentiate instruction based on students’ learning styles and levels to ensure all students can engage and succeed in rigorous tasks. Economically Disadvantaged, Hispanic, LEP and SWD students. 09/2018 to 06/2019 Principal AP Mathematics AP ENL AP ISS Instructional Coaches Teachers Principal APO AP PPS AP Mathematics Instructional Coaches Inquiry Team Guidance Counselors Teachers Teacher Teams Continue to collaborate with Assistant Principals of English, English as a Second Language, and Instructional Support Services and their teachers to develop appropriate curriculum for students taking Regents exams and additional strategies to support progress in literacy and math skills to meet more rigorous standards. Economically Disadvantaged, Hispanic, LEP and SWD students. 09/2018 to 06/2019 Principal AP Mathematics AP English 4  Continue to have staff attend PD for work with ELLs in math content. Continue to offer intensive Regents preparation in the Mathematics classroom on a weekly basis. Continue uniform final examination policy for grades 9, 10 and 11 using Regents as models. Continue to offer tutoring throughout the day, after school, and Saturdays to reinforce concepts and provide more individual support. We also offer specific preparation for the Regents exams weeks prior to each administration. AP ENL AP ISS Teachers Economically Disadvantaged, Hispanic, LEP and SWD students. Economically Disadvantaged, LEP and SWD students. Teacher Teams 09/2018 to 06/2019 Principal AP Mathematics AP ENL AP ISS Instructional Coaches Teachers 09/2018 to 06/2019 Principal AP Mathematics AP ENL AP ISS Instructional Coaches Teachers 5  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Each term we send formal communication about the requirements in math for students to pass and be college and career ready. In addition, we provide multiple forms of communication to alert students and families about tutoring and Regents Prep both after school and on Saturday (letters, email, phone blasts, signs in building, via classroom teacher, etc.). Principal, AP of Math, Guidance Counselors, math teachers at the end of each marking period are all sending the message to take advantage of tutoring and the requirement to be college ready in math. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Assign staff to refine curriculum aligned with NYS Next Generation Learning Standards and Framework for Great Schools 2018-2019 in order for 9th grade students taking the Algebra 1 Regents to achieve a grade of 65 or better. This performance by our 9th graders will help us increase overall student success.  All instructional staff will implement instructional strategies to aid in vocabulary development, understanding the task, and solving verbal problems.  Provide tutoring for students who scored 65-69 on the Algebra Regents in order for them to increase their score to at least a 70 to meet the CUNY standard of College and Career readiness. Funds for per session will be allocated accordingly.  Data reflection on periodic assessments and Regents results to implement appropriate instructional strategies with respect to polynomial operations, factoring, and equation solving.  Utilize Student Data Portal from New Visions to select subgroups of students to monitor throughout the school year and offer additional academic intervention as needed.  Assign academic coaches (Math, English, ISS and ENL) as needed to work with teachers to strengthen their use of multiple entry point strategies to improve student engagement and learning.  Utilize a Math Coach to work with teams of teachers to strengthen rigor and engagement.  Opportunities for professional development with external organizations such as New Visions. In addition, schedule professional inter-visitations, differentiate instruction, integrate technology and sharing of best instructional practices among teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  We will evaluate marking period scholarship (3 marking periods per term) and make use of the marking period analysis tool on the Data Portal from New Visions to better support subgroups of students as well as teachers with a passing rate lower than 75%. Adjustments to our action plan will be made for Term 2 as progress indicates.  Each course administered a baseline and will measure progress from the baseline data to the mid-year assessment. Teachers will evaluate this data in teacher teams at the end of January 2019.  We will analyze Regents-aligned midterm and final exam performance each semester and adjust instruction accordingly per students on/off track to succeed. Teachers will collaborate on strategies to support students not making sufficient progress on skills needed to achieve college readiness on math exams. 6   We will evaluate progress toward reaching the 86% passing rate on the Algebra Regents after the January 2019 administration with an expectation to be at 83% after the January administration.  The 9th grade interdisciplinary grade level teacher team will review student progress on the literacy skills of focus across the school as well as math skills. Teachers will collaborate to assess student progress on the following: student's ability to understand a task, read closely, find evidence to make a claim, and develop evidence to support a claim both verbally and in writing. The instructional focus is aligned with the needs of our students and will support students meeting the more rigorous standards to be college and career ready per the NYC 2018-2019 Framework for Great Schools. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.)  The Data Portal from New Visions will help track credit accumulation and progress on Regents.  Datacation will be utilized to analyze student progress on specific skills aligned to the Next Generation Math Standards.  REDS report will be analyzed to assess student performance on each Regents as administered (June 2018, August 2018, January 2019, and June 2019). Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? An essential component to student achievement is regular attendance in an environment where staff knows students well and provides support for them to succeed. An analysis of the 2017-18, 2016-17, and 2015-16 ATS attendance reports indicate an average attendance rate of over 90% (90.3% most recently in 2017-18). This statistic is noteworthy and impressive, meeting the Chancellor’s 90% minimum attendance standard. However, this statistic reflects Fort Hamilton High School’s attendance statistic after 1 and 3 periods of attendance. NB: DOE Attendance Law and Policy permits and requires that students’ daily attendance be reversed from absent to present if the student is present for 1 period. This reversal is done using the PCAT scan sheet, while the reversal of attendance for 3 or more periods is an automatic function on ATS. Fort Hamilton High School’s attendance statistics prior to reversals must be targeted, as this statistic reveals a cutting problem which affects scholarship in selected classes. The following numbers are apparent: 2017-18 Attendance Analysis Goal Average Attendance Statistic before reversals = 84.77% 86% Though we did not make our target attendance rate of 85% before reversals in academic year 2017-2018, we will continue to be ambitious and strive for a one percent increase in our attendance rate before reversals. This expectation is based on the fact that we are closing the gaps between ATS official attendance after reversal and CAASS data [before reversal].  2016-2017 Attendance Statistics - ATS 90.4% (after reversals) and CAASS 86.14% (actual before reversals)  2017-2018 Attendance Statistics - ATS 90.3% (after reversals) and CAASS 88.0% (actual before reversals) The difference / gap between ATS and CAASS data has decreased 4.26% to 2.3%. This decrease is significant and noteworthy as it reflects more accurate attendance taking measures by teachers and a 2.3% increase of students attending more classes, more regularly. We will continue to refine our current interventions strategies and implement new preventive measure that will aid in achieving the target attendance goal of 86%, before reversals, by focusing on students' previous year's attendance rate and encouraging those students early on with rewards for good attendance and support students with poor attendance through early parental and student outreach. This focus will impact scholarship, credit accumulation and graduation rates overall. Similar to the barriers which impede our graduation rate: 44.82% and 48.72% of incoming 9th grade students with 8th grade NYSED scores scoring at levels 1-2 in the Grade 8 ELA and Mathematics exams respectively, an exceeding building capacity – over 195%, a large ELL population of 15% (703 students out of 4598), with a high mobility rate, and an increasing ISS population (15.93% in 2017-18), all negatively impact student attendance. These populations 8  historically have an attendance rate less than 75%. The building's over-utilization limits us from reducing class sizes and double periods, as well as our ability to offer students the opportunity to repeat failed courses during the regular day program. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Students will demonstrate progress towards achieving an 86% attendance rate, before reversals, by June 2019. Meeting this goal is consistent with our efforts to ensure that students attend the entire instructional day. Our average daily attendance is 90.3% as of June 2018 and the rate of attendance, before reversals, is 84.2%. Reaching for 86% in 2018-2019 will close the gap of students who attend school partial school days. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). We will monitor the attendance behavior of incoming 9th graders with less than 80% attendance in middle school and provide rewards for improved high school attendance behavior and implement strong parental and student support with students that are exhibiting poor attendance behavior in at Fort Hamilton HS. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Incoming 9th graders 09/2018 to 06/2019 Principal AP PPS AP Data and Compliance (DC) Guidance Counselors Attendance Squad 09/2018 to 06/2019 Principal APs Supervision AP PPS AP DC Guidance Counselors Attendance Squad Teachers Principal APs Supervision AP PPS AP DC Guidance Counselors Attendance Squad We will create target groups of students who are late for school and failed the first or second period of their day. An inquiry team will devote time to analyzing student performance and explore outreach strategies to support students failing to attend their first or second period of the day. Students arriving late for school We will conduct lobby outreach utilizing CAASS technology and providing guidance outreach on a daily basis. 09/2018 to 06/2019 Students with 45s in a regents course 0  We will provide targeted parent outreach to students who cut courses during the school day via CAASS email alerts, Skedula blasts, phone outreach, letters, and direct guidance outreach. We will have monthly meetings with the Attendance Committee and Project Success to review cut reports, review subgroups, and generate new or refined approaches to improve student attendance. Students cutting 2+ times a week in any course Students with less than 90% attendance. Teachers Principal 09/2018 to 06/2019 APs Supervision AP PPS AP DC Guidance Counselors 09/2018 to 06/2019 Teachers Principal APs Supervision AP PPS AP DC Guidance Counselors Teachers Principal APs Supervision AP PPS Guidance Counselors 09/2018 to 06/2019 09/2018 to 06/2019 Teachers Principal APs Supervision AP PPS Guidance Counselors Teachers We will refer, when necessary, students and their families to outside counseling, supporting students in addressing any social-emotional obstacles that may be impeding academic progress. We will provide parent workshops for parents to support parents in addressing social-emotional needs of their teens, with special emphasis on the importance of regular attendance. Students with attendance less than 90% Parents of ELL and ISS students. 1  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents are provided daily correspondence from the school in regards to their child's attendance in the form of emails that generate when their child swipes into the building via the CAASS system. Further, targeted parental outreach occurs via phone calls and letters each week as School Aides and Counselors target students who fail to swipe into the building for five days or show sporadic attendance (missing 7 out of 20 days) for immediate parental outreach each week. Likewise, the Blackboard Connect system informs parents daily if their child is absent and each week targeted phone blasts alert parents of student who are cutting courses throughout the day. Parents are provided PupilPath access so that they can monitor daily attendance as well as monitor their child's academic performance in all classes and communicate with teachers and other key staff members. Chronic and problematic attendance issues are monitored via case conferencing, documented on a shared Google sheet and escalated to guidance conferences. Guidance conferences are conducted to support families and to provide counseling and community resources to assist in remedying both the presenting and underlying problem. These systems and structures are monitored by the AP Pupil Personnel Services and AP Data and Compliance. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Providers of services collaborate with each other, as well as with community-based organizations, ACS if necessary, to expand services that support parents and students in meeting the school’s instructional and attendance expectations. Fort Hamilton High School will consistently enforce the need for accurate attendance taking procedures, identifying teachers as the first step in responding to problematic attendance issues. Specifically, teachers will make telephone calls, send letters, and obtain e-mail addresses when possible and establish contact with parent(s) via Pupil Path. Chronic, unresolved cases will be referred to Project Success. The coordinator will assist in the early identification of at-risk students due to attendance, addressing cutting and absenteeism via home visits, case conferencing, outreach for daily cutting. Project Success personnel will continue to collaborate and interface with guidance personnel on an as-needed basis, scheduling guidance meetings to address chronic attendance issues. Guidance personnel will meet with students and parents, evaluating students’ academic needs and making appropriate AIS or ACS referrals. If necessary, guidance counselors will discuss alternative educational opportunities with all eligible students. Eligible students will be invited to our bi-annual Alternative Education Fair. When warranted, psycho-social support, i.e., counseling and outside mental health / family support services will be extended. Lowest-third population will participate in guidance social skills lessons. Individual and group counseling sessions will be extended to all eligible / interested students. Utilize special features on CAASS, entry system where students swipe with an ID card, to help identify students not attending their first period class(es). 2  Utilize per session hours for school aides and counselors to make special outreach to students not attending school all day. Responsible staff will conduct activities during the regular school day and during an extended day (all activities included):  AP Organization  AP PPS and AP DC  Assigned Family Assistants  Attendance Teacher  Case Conferencing Teams  Guidance Counselors  Principal  Project Success Coordinator*  Teachers Refer, as needed, students to community based organizations, providing families with counseling services. Students and families will be referred to the following agencies: Jewish Board of Family & Children’s Services  Administration of Children Services  Thrive NYC Resources  NYC Well Resources  Crisis Intervention Services / LIFENET  Bensonhurst Mental Health  Coney Island Hospital   Maimonides Medical Center  Neighborhood Counseling Center   Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy  The Door  Center for Family Life Family Support Center  Freedom From Fear Recommend AIS to students in jeopardy of not meeting cohort graduation requirements, supporting the lowest third, as well as Students with Disabilities and ELLs. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  Monitor and compare Marking Period attendance and Scholarship data as it is reported on ATS, CAASS and STARS every term for a total of 6 times per academic year.  Continue weekly cutting report to better account for accuracy with attendance.  Implement a targeted outreach to students not attending their first period class but having success for the remainder of the day. Compare students in subgroup failing at the end of Term 1 MP 2 against those failing at the end of Term 1. 3   Guidance counselors and attendance personnel communicate attendance expectations to students and parents via guidance conferences, home visits, phone calls, letters, text messages and emails via Pupilpath and/or Google voice  Guidance counselors meet with all students during Programming and Progress Interviews, conduct Naviance college and career readiness lessons, individual and group counseling and inform students of academic and attendance expectations in the fall and spring terms  Teachers refer students to Project Success after 2-3 consecutive absences and inform parents via Pupil Path, letters and phone calls of potential attendance problems, readily identifying cutting behavior in order to build trust and reciprocal accountability. We will monitor referrals to Project Success at the end of each Marking Period and note successes in students' shifts in attendance.  Attendance Committee meets monthly to review outreach efforts and how to improve systems for identifying correct contact information in order to build stronger family and community ties.  Teacher teams and the school-wide Inquiry Team review scholarship reports to identify the correlation between attendance and scholarship.  We will assess our progress toward reaching the 86% attendance before reversals after each marking period and add or adjust systems accordingly. We look to be at 86% at the end of Term 1.  AP DC runs weekly attendance inconsistencies report to monitor attendance taking practices by teachers to ensure accurate attendance data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Data from CAASS with entry time when students swipe into the building will be analyzed to see which students are missing 1st and 2nd period of the day. Outreach will be conducted accordingly.  We will indicate students in need of attention on CAASS so that they can be addressed upon entry.  Counselors will be assigned to the lobby to assist with student outreach once the indicator is put on CAASS for subgroups of students not attending 1st and 2nd period regularly.  Cutting reports from ATS will be reviewed regularly and phone calls made accordingly. All calls and emails will  be iLogged on ATS. Scholarship data from STARS will be reviewed to assess classes where more students are struggling, or which students are struggling in specific classes.  Each supervisory AP will meet with teachers to review scholarship data and evaluate additional supports to assist in more student success.  Each supervisory AP will meet with the principal to review department scholarship and outcome of conversations with teachers. Departmental and school-wide responses will be determined. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. An instructional focus on literacy across the content areas resulted in improved Regents results across the board in June 2018. This required collaboration within departments and across the building. The instructional focus will continue to be literacy in 2018-2019 at the same time the rigor and standards to pass the ELA Regents have increased with the NYS Next Generation Learning Standards. Collaboration is increasingly important to provide coherence throughout classrooms and in setting clear expectations of all students. In addition, an increasing number of students in the Integrated Collaborative Teaching setting requires that we have more teams of general education teachers working with special education teachers across the core content areas. Collaboration is essential for our entire school, and a focus on improving literacy skills will support the more rigorous demands of the ELA Regents. Results of the ELA Regents examination indicate that the number of students failing to reach a passing score of 65% in the 2018 Cohort is 155 out of 1,114 total students, as of June 2018. After conducting our needs assessment, it was found that the Economically Disadvantaged, LEP, Asian, Hispanic, and Students with Disabilities student groups have under-performed all other subgroups for the past three years, according to the NYSED annual school report card. The subgroups of greatest concern in the 2018 cohort not passing include ELLs and SWDs. The percentage of the cohort (15.98% ELLs and 15.93% SWDs) is consistent with the 2018 cohort. Student achievement on the Grade 8 ELA exam for incoming students in September 2018 indicates that 44.82% of students with 8th grade NYSED scores from our feeder schools scored at levels 1-2. NYSED benchmarks demand that students score at levels 3-4. As a school requiring academic progress, we continue to monitor this trend toward low student achievement on Grade 8 assessments. Review of performance on assessments, such as the PSAT, indicate student weakness in reading comprehension, literary response and expression, citing and developing evidence, and vocabulary development. Illiteracy among ELL students in both the Native and English language is due to an increase in the number of students with interrupted formal education. In addition to long-term ELL students, we have an increase in the number of immigrant students in Hispanic, Asian and Economically Disadvantaged subgroups who are not entitled to ENL, but who entered high school from 2014-2015 and may still have deficiencies in ELA. (Title III-Immigrant) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Students will demonstrate progress towards achieving NYS Standards on the ELA Regents with an 85% passing rate for Cohort 2019 by August 2019. Meeting this goal includes students with a qualifying score. The goal for Cohort 2019 is consistent with the final passing rate for Cohort 2018 of 85% that includes students with a qualifying score. We will continue to focus on increasing the passing rate for both English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  We will analyze and utilize data from Classroom Baseline Writing Assessments, PSAT, ELA Regents results, and individual student performance on classroom literacy tasks as a means to plan specific long-term and short-term instructional goals via Inquiry Teams, Teacher Teams and ICT Teams. Teachers and students will set instructional goals and plans for achievement of individual objectives. Progress toward achieving these goals will be measured with interim assessments in November, January and March, and a summative assessment in May. We will strengthen use of Datacation/Skedula/PupilPath as a uniform on-line grade book for increased communication with staff, students and parents regarding student progress and achievement of standards and learning goals. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Limited English Proficiency (LEP), Economically Disadvantaged (ED), and Students with Disabilities (SWD) subgroups Limited English Proficiency (LEP), Economically Disadvantaged (ED), and Students with Disabilities (SWD) subgroups Limited English Proficiency (LEP), Economically Disadvantaged (ED), and Students with Disabilities (SWD) subgroups 09/2018 to 06/2019 Principal 09/2018 to 06/2019 APs Supervision Teachers of ELA, ENL/WL, ISS All Teachers Instructional Coaches AP Data Principal APs Supervision Teachers of ELA, ESL/WL, ISS All Teachers Instructional Coaches AP Data 09/2018 to 06/2019 Principal APs Supervision Teachers of ELA, ESL/WL, ISS All Teachers Instructional Coaches Data Specialist 6 We will expand the numbers of students offered College Aptitude – ELA as an elective course, to Grade 10 students and College Inquiry and Research to Grade 11 in conjunction with English as a means for students to learn effective standardized test-taking strategies across content areas, increase reading comprehension, develop and expand content vocabulary and research and inquiry, improve PSAT and SAT scores, and build college and career readiness. Grades 10-11 students 09/2018 to 06/2019 Principal APs Supervision Guidance Counselors Teachers of ELA and Math 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Each term we send formal communication about the requirements in ELA for students to pass and be college and career ready. In addition, we provide multiple forms of communication to alert students and families about tutoring and Regents Prep both after school and on Saturday (letters, email, phone blasts, signs in building, via classroom teacher, etc.). Principal, AP of ELA and AP of ENL, Guidance Counselors, ELA/ENL teachers at the end of each marking period are all sending the message to take advantage of tutoring and the requirement to be college ready in ELA. In addition, we provide an after-school writing center to support student writing for both Regents and college. The library hours are also extended for students to get access to resources and personnel to assist with writing. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional Development will be refined and offered during weekly Teacher Team meetings across content areas, dedicated professional development days, monthly department and faculty meetings, organized inter-visitations, and during workshops internally and externally.  Ramp-Up Structure: Rituals and Routines Revised and Updated for Academic Rigor (Literacy Coaches)  Differentiated Strategies for Lesson Planning and Task Rotations - (Tomlinson and Silver, Strong)  Curriculum Revision for Honors Classes--Increasing text complexity and parallels with Social Studies (collaboration through Interdisciplinary- Social Studies and ELA Teacher Team)  Reflection on Student Performance to plan and set Individual Student Goals and Objectives ( PSAT, and uniform grade level assessment created by ELA teachers) Infusing grammar and vocabulary into instructional objectives (ENL and ISS Coaches)   Writing instruction as a process/Hochman Basic Writing Program (Interdisciplinary and ELA teacher teams)  Rubrics for evaluation of process and product (Rubistar)  Organizing and Reflecting on Writing Portfolios (Literacy, ENL, and ISS Coaches)   Using the SmartBoard for interactive learning (SmartBoard Professional Development)  ELA Regents Writing Strategies for Transitional English Classes/Hochman Basic Writing Program (ELA and ENL “Six-Minute Solution” to build fluency in reading (Literacy Coach) Coaches)  Using the IPAD as a communication and instructional tool in the ELA classroom (Library Media Specialist) Strategies to improve reading comprehension in ELA and ENL classes (Literacy, ENL, and ISS Coaches and  Interdisciplinary/ELA teacher teams)  Danielson’s Framework for Effective Teaching (Principal and APs)  Empower 3000 – On Line Lexile Reading Program (Achieve 3000 on-line support and three sessions of professional development)  College Board/Acuity/Scantron webinars 7   EngageNY – NYS Next Generation Standards in ELA curriculum, professional development workshops and webinars.  Reading Strategies: Wilson and REWARDS  Question Formulation Technique (QFT) and Question Relationship (QAR) strategies  Datacation/Skedula/PupilPath - Enhanced use of online grade books and data reporting (Coaches, APs and teacher team leaders)  Newsela.com, Commonlit.org and Vocabulary.com -digital tools to track student achievement in reading literature, non-fiction and building and expanding vocabulary.  Utilize four academic coaches to support teacher collaboration and differentiate coaching to individuals and/or teacher teams.  Utilize two model teachers in interdisciplinary inquiry teams. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. MONITOR READING COMPREHENSION AND WRITTEN ARGUMENTS IN RESPONSE TO INFORMATIONAL/LITERARY TEXTS  We will continue to implement research-based programs and monitor student progress via Empower 3000, Newsela.com, Vocabulary.com, Commonlit.org, Hochman Writing Program, REWARDS and Wilson reading strategies to address learning gaps for ELLs, Students with Disabilities and Economically Disadvantaged students and monitor the progress of students with each..  We will continue to offer ELA Ramp-Up literacy curriculum in a double period class for all Grade 9 students scoring at levels 1-2 on the 8th grade ELA exam and monitor their preparation for success on the ELA Regents as well as their success on the exam. We will review the January 2019 ELA Regents results for students who began 9th grade in our literacy program to see the passing percentage and the acquisition of the CUNY benchmark of grade 75.  We will maintain and assess student portfolios containing required writing samples assessed with ELA Regents rubrics and offer students multiple opportunities to take the exam.  We will implement minimum writing requirements for each term of English (1-8), which are congruent with the ELA Regents examinations and the NYS Next Generation Learning Standards.  We will continue the uniform final examination policy for grades 9, 10 and 11, using non-fiction writing tasks on the ELA Regents as models.  We will measure progress on the culminating literacy task in May 2019 against student performance on a similar task in September 2018. Students will be asked to read and analyze literary and informational texts and write arguments in response.  We will implement literacy skill development across all subjects as our school wide instructional focus: to develop student ability to understand a task, find evidence to make a claim, and develop evidence to support a claim both verbally and in writing. The instructional focus is aligned with the needs of our students and will support students meeting the more rigorous standards to be college and career ready per the NYC 2018-19 Framework for Great Schools.  Newsela.com, Vocabulary.com, and Academic Vocabulary Toolkit – tools to track student achievement in reading non-fiction and building and expanding vocabulary.  Teacher teams led by model teachers – cycles of professional development work on text-based questioning, discussion, assessment, Hochman writing strategies and Next Generation Curriculum implementation as well as engaging students via multiple entry points. 8   We will measure progress toward the 85% goal by evaluating success after the January 2019 administration of the English Regents and expect to reach at least 79.5%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ELA and ENL teachers will compare the final assessment (argumentative essay) for Term 1 against the baseline assessment given at the beginning of the school year. ELA and ENL teachers will analyze student performance on the January 2018 ELA Regents. ELA and ENL teachers will track student progress and compare the final assessment for Term 2 against the Term 1 final assessment. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Programming students and providing them with highly qualified educators and resources to meet college and career readiness standards are the responsibilities of leadership. Meeting the needs of Fort Hamilton High School’s diverse student population that includes a large ELL population and an increasing number of students with disabilities necessitates a strong and effective leadership team that builds capacity across the building. The impact of leadership is most evident in the school’s graduation rate. We have multiple barriers which impede our graduation rate: 44.82% and 48.73% of incoming 9th grade students with 8th grade NYSED scores (only 80%) scored at levels 1-2 in the Grade 8 ELA and Mathematics exams respectively, an exceeding building capacity – over 185%, an ELL population of 15.91% (703 students out of 4,598), with a high mobility rate, and an increasing ISS population, all negatively impact student attendance. These populations historically have an attendance rate less than 75%. Finally, the inability, due to overcrowding to offer reduced classes across the content areas may further impact student attendance, as the class size is, in most instances, at the contractual limit. Our historical data on school completion indicate the following percentages of students graduated: 2017*-2018 NYS Report Card data not available 2016-2017 NYS Report Card indicated - 77% out of 1066 students 2015-2016 NYS Report Card indicated - 75% out of 977 students 2014-2015 NYS Report Card indicated - 68% out of 1098 students *NB: The bolded years indicate the academic years in question, e.g. the 2016-2017 NYS data aligns to the NYC School Quality Guide data for 2015-2016. The bolded years connect / align as the NY State Annual School Report Card reports the prior year’s graduation rate as of August of the highlighted year. 2017-2018 NYC School Quality Guide - 81% out of 1113 2016-2017 NYC School Quality Guide - 75% out of 1094 2015-2016 NYC School Quality Guide - 77% out of 1067 2014-2015 NYC School Quality Guide - 74.2% out of 985 students 0  2013-2014 NYC School Quality Guide - 68.1% out of 1090 students In contextualizing the above graduation rates, certain factors became evident. Namely, 19% of students do not earn enough credits in 10th grade to be on track for graduation and 14% of the ninth grade class does not earn enough credits to be on track for graduation. Approximately 44.82% and 48.72% of the incoming ninth grade class enters the ninth grade with performance levels 1 or 2 in English and Mathematics, respectively (of those tested). Compounding this reality is the fact that Fort Hamilton continues to exceed its official capacity. The building is approximately 185% over-utilized. Over utilization limits the number of reduced-sized classes and double periods, as well as our ability to offer students the opportunity to repeat failed courses during the regular day program. School wide second marking period scholarship for the Spring 2018 is 83.66%, which is highly correlated to their attendance rate of 84.7% before reversals. The success with students who attend is high, so improving overall attendance will have an positive impact on credit accumulation and overall graduation rate. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Students will demonstrate progress towards achieving NYS Standards for a 4-year graduation with an 81% rate for Cohort 2019 by August 2019. Meeting this goal represents a small increase over the final graduation rate for Cohort 2018 of 80.7% and incrementally exceeding the definitive State Standard of 80%. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Leaders will create, support and maintain systems to consistently inform and collaborate with parents, strategizing an academic intervention plan that will support the student in making academic progress. Students not meeting promotional requirements 09/2018 to 06/2019 Principal APs Supervision Guidance Counselors will identify and address credit gaps early on for cohort 2019 students and 5th year students by providing the below credit recovery opportunities: Doubling-up Blended Learning 09/2018 to 6/2019 Cohort seniors and 5th year students with with credits gaps Credit Recovery by Application (Target Credit Recovery) Online Learning via Edgenuity Summer School Dedicate teacher time to examine Regents performance data and rubrics to best determine skills necessary for student success and keep all instructional staff informed how they can support the students’ instructional needs / deficits. Students not meeting promotional requirements AP PPS AP DC Guidance Counselors Attendance Squad Teachers Principal AP PPS AP DC Guidance Counselors 09/2018 to 06/2019 Principal APs Supervision AP PPS AP DC Guidance Counselors 2 Conduct frequent informal observations to provide formative feedback to guide and strengthen instructional practice. 09/2018 to 06/2019 Students not meeting promotional requirements Conduct cycles of looking at student work with specific protocols to better determine high leverage skill gaps. Attendance Squad Teachers Principal APs Supervision AP PPS AP DC Guidance Counselors Attendance Squad Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Excellent attendance is a key element in progressing towards graduation. Parents are provided daily correspondence from the school in regards to their child's attendance in the form of emails that generate when their child swipes into the building via the CAASS system. Further, targeted parental outreach occurs each week as School Aides and Counselors target students who fail to swipe into the building for five days or show sporadic attendance (missing 7 out of 20 days) for immediate phone outreach each week. Likewise, the Blackboard Connect system informs parents daily if their child is absent and each week targeted phone blasts alert parents of student who are cutting courses throughout the day. Also, targeted phone blasts, text message via PupilPath and Google voice inform parents of students who are cutting and failing the first part of their school day in an effort to ensure that students arrive on time. Beyond this, each semester inquiry teams create target groups of students who cut the end of their school day for parental outreach. A highly informed and effective guidance department supports students towards completing graduation requirements within a 4-year time frame. Guidance counselors conduct Programming and Progress interviews bi-annually with students to communicate academic progress towards graduation, require parental confirmation of academic plan that has been created between the student and guidance counselor. Guidance counselors conduct grades 9 - 12 Naviance tasks / college and career preparation lessons to support students in making informed college and career decisions. Parents are given access to Naviance, informing parents of college deadlines, scholarship opportunities, college information workshops and college vists and college fairs. Academic supports are provided for students that are struggling academically via NHS peer-tutoring department-wide tutoring and Saturday Academy for tutoring and Regents preparation. Senior credit gaps analysis is conducted at the beginning of each term and students that are deficit in credits are doubled-up in the deficit subject area, are provided 3  targeted credit recovery opportunities if eligible and/or are given an on-line Edgenuity course to make-up the deficit credit. Students are programmed for summer school as needed. Finally, students' social-emotional needs are addressed via guidance lessons, individual counseling, at-risk counseling and structured group counseling sessions. Guidance counselors make referrals to mental health providers and to community agency to assist students and families with social-emotional concerns. Guidance counselors participate professional development opportunities to refine their counseling skills as well as gain new knowledge on current issues that affect adolescents. Guidance counselors are trained in de-escalation techniques, child abuse prevention, LGBTQ topics, mindfulness education as well as college and career readiness programs e.g. Naviance and Academic Policy. Students' social-emotional interventions are monitored by assigned guidance counselors and the AP PPS, while the credit gaps analysis and attendance interventions are monitored by guidance counselors, Project Success attendance team, attendance teacher, the AP PPS and the AP Data and Compliance. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Conduct professional development on NYS and multiple entry points to strengthen teacher practice and improve student achievement.  Provide funds for teachers to gain professional development at conferences or at a college that can be turn keyed with other staff in the building.  Provide funds for consultants to provide engaging and focused professional development for staff that will support student engagement.  Provide consultants for student programs that will engage and incentivize students to succeed across the content areas.  Conduct ongoing professional development on Danielson Framework of Teaching.  Continue to infuse Hochman Basic Writing strategies across content areas.  Allocate funds to train additional staff in the Hochman Basic Writing program across content areas.  Continue to align curriculum with Common Core Learning Standards to help students meet college and career readiness.  Continue to conduct intervisitations – sharing of best practices and allocate coverage pay to facilitate.  Continue teacher teams to rigorous curriculum and formative and summative assessments.  Continue to implement technology as an interactive learning tool that will also prepare them for college and career.  Provide under-credited students with credit recovery opportunities (credit by application, Edgenuity, summer school, and recovering credits during school day). Activities listed above directly correlate with the school wide instructional focus, classroom outcomes, credit accumulation and student engagement. Improving teacher performance through the above activities will improve student performance / outcomes and therefore increase student graduation rate, creating a solid instructional foundation for students supported by curriculum alignment, data reflection and the sharing of best practices. Providers of services collaborate with each other, as well as with community-based organizations, ACS if necessary, to expand services that support parents and students in meeting the school’s instructional and attendance expectations. Fort Hamilton High School will consistently enforce the need for accurate attendance taking procedures, utilizing PCAT forms and the teacher attendance inconsistencies report. Teachers will make telephone calls, send letters, and obtain e-mail addresses when possible and establish contact with parent(s) via PupilPath. Chronic, unresolved cases will be referred to Project Success. The coordinator will assist in the early identification of at-risk students due to attendance, addressing cutting and absenteeism via home visits, case conferencing, and daily cutting outreach. Guidance will coordinate accurate email addresses for CAASS and PupilPath outreach. Project Success personnel will 4  continue to collaborate and interface with guidance personnel on an as-needed basis, scheduling guidance meetings to address chronic attendance issues. Guidance personnel will meet with students and parents, evaluating students’ academic needs and making appropriate AIS referrals, if necessary, Guidance Counselors will discuss alternative educational opportunities with all eligible students. Eligible students will be invited to our bi-annual Alternative Education Fair. When warranted, psycho-social support, i.e., counseling and outside mental health / family support services will be extended. Lowest-third population will participate in guidance social skills lessons. Individual and group counseling sessions will be extended to all eligible / interested students. Responsible staff (all activities included):  Principal  AP Organization, AP Security, AP PPS, AP DC, AP Programming & Technology  APs of Supervision  Teachers  Attendance Teacher  Guidance Counselors  Teachers Refer, as needed, students to community based organizations, providing families with counseling services. Students and families will be referred to the following agencies: Jewish Board of Family & Children’s Services  Administration of Children Services  NYC Well Resources  Thrive NYC Resources  Crisis Intervention Services / LIFENET  Bensonhurst Mental Health  Coney Island Hospital   Maimonides Medical Center  Neighborhood Counseling Center   Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy  The Door  Center for Family Life Family Support Center  Freedom From Fear Recommend AIS to students in jeopardy of not meeting cohort graduation requirements, supporting the lowest third, as well as Students with Disabilities and ELLs. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  Teachers refer students to Project Success after 2-3 consecutive absences and inform parents via PupilPath, letters and phone calls of potential attendance problems, readily identifying cutting behavior in order to build trust and reciprocal accountability. 5   Inquiry Team meetings will analyze credit accumulation and Regents progress for cohorts of students and subgroups to assess the need for additional AIS, credit recovery opportunities, Regents prep, and social emotional support.  Cabinet will review outreach efforts and how to improve systems and methods to provide credit recovery, AIS, or supports to address social emotional concerns.  Regular meetings with the attendance team to ensure outreach efforts are conducted, reports utilized, and efforts altered to improve attendance.  We will use marking period data throughout academic year 2018/2019, as reported on STARS, New Visions Data Portal, Datacation / Skedula, assisting counselors in identifying those students in need of credit recovery opportunities as well as Academic Intervention Services. In the area of math, we have identified 9th graders below a 610 scale score on the Math 8th grade State Assessment, in the area of English Language Arts we have identified 50% of 9th graders ( 451 out of 893 students with NYSED scores ) below a 603 scale score, and 27% of these 9th graders (116 out of 893 students) are ENL students. These students need AIS in the form of double or triple periods of instruction, school-day and extended-day tutoring, small-group instruction, Saturday tutoring, and in some instances, collaborative team teaching (as determined by a student’s IEP).  We will have inquiry cohort committees review 2018 cohort credit accumulation and performance Regents data. Additionally, overall academic performance for ISS and ELL students is reviewed and AIS is provided.  We will continue to conduct early attendance outreach, utilizing teacher referrals, PupilPath, CAASS, Cut Reports, and Project Success attendance intervention, supporting students in maintaining 90% attendance.  We will identify the academic needs of those students designated promotion-in-doubt by January 2018 on ATS.  We will monitor attendance in AIS activities and measure progress in the classroom and Regents exams.  We will monitor progress of students whose families are engaged in outside counseling, and provide ongoing support for students in addressing any social-emotional obstacles that may be impeding academic progress.  We will analyze credit gaps and monitor progress toward the 81% graduation goal after Term 1 and make adjustments accordingly to maximize our ability to support students toward a 4-year graduation. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.     Instrument of Measure is the Student Data Portal from New Visions. Student Data Portal from New Visions that tracks credit accumulation for each cohort. Special report from the NV Data Portal tracks credit gaps against where students should be at a certain point in the cohort and term. Special report from the NV Data Portal tracks Regents exams passed and those remaining. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  We have approximately 25% of families attend Parent Teacher Conferences and other events held at the school.  We have a small core of parents working actively on the PTA, but it is approximately 1% of our student population.  Clubs and other extra curricular activity groups participate in community events (parades, perform at elementary and middle schools, mentor elementary students, bring toys to hospitals, clean up parks, host events for community, etc.), but we look to collaborate on events to benefit both students and the community.  We continue to find new ways to engage the community so that the school is better known to the community and the school better knows the community and its needs.  We need our students to have an experience in a career of interest to assist in their college and career exploration process and members of the community are a part of that effort. We have begun to establish partnerships with businesses and professionals in the community who are willing to host our seniors to learn more about the workplace in a career of interest and need to expand those partnerships to facilitate more experiences for our senior cohort of 1,100 students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. We will collaborate on five events with community-based organizations or businesses that bring our students into the community and promote the role of FHHS and all it offers the community. This will strengthen our bond with students, families, and the community-at-large. Specifically, strengthening our relationship will help us develop 15 additional partnerships for our Fort Shadowing Program, currently at 70, to provide career experiences for our Cohort 2019 and beyond. This represents an increase of 21% to accommodate this career experience for our large cohort of seniors. 7 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Alumni, Bay Ridge families and FHHS families. Outreach in November 2018 for a series of forums in November and December 2018 Principal AP Admins AP Supervisory Alumni Association Counselors Parent Coordinator Students Principal AP PPS Guidance Counselors Parent Coordinator Monthly PTA Meetings and other evenings each marking period Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Host a Know Your Rights Forum with the Arab American Association to facilitate community understanding of immigrant rights. Host a day of activities for youngsters in April 2019 and a senior citizen prom for the elderly in May 2019 to help the community appreciate the contributions and energy of Fort Hamilton High School students. Provide parent workshops, via monthly PTA meetings, on graduation requirements, AIS services and College and Career information, assisting parents in supporting their child in meeting academic and social-emotional expectations, as well as the Chancellor’s 90% minimum attendance standard. We will utilize headsets to provide translation specific to our bilingual families in Arabic, Chinese, and Spanish. Families Inform and train parents in accessing www.pupilpath.com to track and monitor their child’s attendance and academic progress. Families Ongoing Principal 09/2018 to 06/2019 AP PPS Provide the parents of ELLs with Parent Workshops in their native language to inform them of the instructional expectations, Families of ELL students Guidance Counselors Parent Coordinator Principal AP PPS Specific evenings and Saturdays during the 8  90% attendance standard, graduation requirements, and college preparation. Just Say Hi is an effort to highlight the inclusion of students with disabilities. We are partnering with William McKinley JHS to share our efforts in the classroom and throughout the school. We will co-host an event to bring attention to inclusion and the value of starting a connection by "just saying hi." We collaborate with professionals and businesses in the community and NYC to host our students for Fort Shadowing. This program offers our seniors a chance to explore career interests by spending time "shadowing" people in specific careers during the school day. We have over 85 partners who have already hosted our students and we look to expand the list to meet the needs of our current senior class. Families All Students McKinley JHS Senior Students 2018-2019 school year AP ESL/WL November 2018 to June 2019 Guidance Counselors Teachers Principal AP ISS AP PE Guidance Counselors Teachers October 2018 to May 2019 Principal AP PPS AP SS Guidance Counselors Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 9  We consistently update our FHHS website to keep the community informed of events at the school. In addition, our Twitter and Instagram accounts alert followers to events taking place and upcoming events the community can participate in. We also hang signs in Bay Ridge businesses for performances to encourage attendance. In addition, the PTA maintains a Parent Resources section on the Fort Hamilton High School website as well as a PTA Facebook page. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Forming a PAC Title I Committee of parents to assess CBOs interested and available in collaborating with Fort Hamilton on at least two to three community events. Title I funds will be utilized to support these events.  Allocate further resources to engage families at various parts of the day (evening and early morning events).  Utilize resources to purchase books to accompany workshops that educate parents on college process, financial literacy, etc.  Utilize tools provided by the family support staff in the superintendent’s office to maximize our ability to monitor and encourage family/community involvement. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  Collect and analyze data related to attendance at Parent Teacher Conferences and compare to 2017-2018.  Conduct surveys about events that families attended over the course of the school year, reasons for attending, other events of interest, etc.  Analyze impact of targeted outreach to families attending or not attending events. Monitor attendance at similar events in 2018-2019.  Guidance counselors and attendance personnel communicate attendance expectations to students and parents via guidance conferences, home visits, phone calls, letters, Datacation/Skedula/PupilPath increasing strong family and community ties.  Guidance counselors meet with all students during Programming and Progress Interviews, social skills guidance lessons, individual and group counseling and inform students of academic and attendance expectations which will pave the path for rigorous instruction. They also support the college application process.  We will host two collaborative event with another school or organization in Term 1 and three events in Term 2. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Attendance at Parent-Teacher Conferences, PTA workshops, school events, etc.  Ticket sales at performances.  Feedback from the community. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) 8thgrade ELA score below grade level Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) AIS: Additional periods of English for at-risk 9thgraders Whole class daily instruction Honor Academy student or in need of additional prep for College Apptitude that includes SAT and college exploration Strategy: Ramp-Up Curriculum AIS: College Aptitude Strategy: Test prep, reading comprehension and writing strategies for PSAT/SAT and all content Regents exams across the disciplines Whole class daily instruction Whole class daily instruction for one term Whole class daily instruction AIS: ELA Regents Prep (E7R) Edgenuity online program supported by content teacher Seniors who need to pass the ELA Regents. Strategy: Test prep strategies for ELA Regents AIS: Credit-bearing Strategy: Curriculum aligned to English 1-8 Small group, classroom atmosphere Students in need of additional credits to earn 8 required. AIS: Credit-bearing online curriculum aligned to NYSNext Generation Learning Standards When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Daily for one year Daily for one term in 10 th grade in addition to English Daily to students who failed ELA in conjunction with English Daily to students in need of credit recovery in English as an additional class Students in need of credit recovery Students who failed or were not tested in ELA Regents or who passed with a grade below 75 1  AIS: Tutoring/Small Any student referred by teacher across the building. group instruction in ELA – Winter 2018/Spring 2019 Mathematics Any student struggling in math. Strategy: Instruction and practice for ELA Regents and assistance with inter-disciplinary writing tasks AIS: Math department sponsored peer tutoring – students assigned National Honor Society Peer Tutoring Saturday Tutoring Any student who needs to pass a math Regents. Small Group Instruction Science Any student in need of additional support in a current science class or to pass a required Regents. Tutoring supported by Title III Immigrant Program to support ELLs Online credit-bearing curriculum aligned to NYSNext Generation Learning Standards Tutoring daily during teacher C6 and/or prep Small group instruction, classroom atmosphere Small group instruction, classroom atmosphere Classroom atmosphere Small group and one-on-one tutoring Classroom atmosphere Edgenuity online program supported by content teacher One-on-one in the library and/or designated classrooms Daily 2-3 times/week Students attend one day/week Students attend one day/week Saturdays in the Spring term and after-school Provided to students in need of credit recovery Daily Saturdays in months leading to Regents exams Alternating Saturdays and consecutive Saturdays 1-2 months leading to Regents exams NHS Peer Tutoring After-School Tutoring Classroom atmosphere Saturday Regents Prep Small group and/or classroom instruction 2  Social Studies Any student in need of support in social studies or who needs to pass Regents. Saturday Tutoring We also provide laboratory make-up sessions for students deficient in the amount of lab work needed to be eligible for their respective science Regents. These lab make-up sessions are offered after-school and Saturdays. Credit recovery opportunities are available for students deficient in the required amount of science credits to graduate or to progress with their cohort are offered with online curriculum aligned to NYS Science Standards and CCLS. Students receiving AIS for Social Studies attend the following services: Global, US History, Economics and Government Tutoring daily during teacher C6 assignment and/or prep NHS Peer Tutoring Tutoring after school during December One-on-one and classrooms atmosphere Classroom atmosphere Edgenuity online program supported by content teacher Alternating Saturdays and consecutive Saturdays 1-2 months leading to Regents exams Saturdays Daily access with teacher support two days/week One-on-one tutoring Daily One-on-one 2-3 times/week Classroom atmosphere Classroom atmosphere Classroom atmosphere Saturdays in the months leading to Regents exams Materials distributed via class or department AP 3  All students At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Edgenuity online program supported by content teacher Whole class Individual and/or small group Individual and/or small group Individual and/or small group Individual and/or small group 2017 and January 2018and May-June 2018 Saturday Regents Prep – January 2018 and May-June 2018 Students are provided with notes, review packets, and online resources in the respective subject matter as well as taught skills in test taking. Credit recovery opportunities are available for students deficient in the required amount of science credits to graduate or to progress with their cohort are offered with online curriculum aligned to NYS Social Studies Standards and CCLS. Starting in November 2018and ending in May 2019 students engage in 12 lessons on “Overcoming Obstacles” and “Common Sense” curricula, providing social skills training on the following topics: anti-bullying training, suicide prevention, College and Career exploration, time management, graduation requirements, and stress management. Throughout the 2018-2019academic Daily access with teacher support two days/week Multiple times per semester Multiple times per semester Multiple times per semester As required by IEP or as needed per recommendations of teachers and other staff As required by IEP or as needed per recommendations of 4  teachers and other staff year, on anas-needed basis, students participate in individual counseling and group counseling for 10 sessions. In addition, during the Fall 2018and the Spring 2019terms, counselors conduct Programming and Progress Interviews. Guidance counselors review overall academic progress and project programs based on State and City academic requirements, assisting students meeting cohort graduation requirements and being productive individuals during and beyond the high school period. College and career exploration begins freshmen year via Naviance exposure. In the junior year, college advisement is provided each term through classroom presentations, individual advisement is provided to all juniors at least 1-2 times via Collegeboard.com, Naviance and Pupilpath/Edge, assisting students with financial aid, college application admission process and SAT preparation. School Psychologists, in collaboration with 5  the IEP team, review established IEPs triennially to reassess students’ progress toward meeting academic and social-emotional goals and provide any additional supports and advocacy as needed. In addition, the school psychologists conduct initial evaluations in collaboration with the school social workers, as well as re-evaluations based on the student’s academic progress. Finally, re-evaluations are conducted by-request by parents, making any necessary academic adjustments based on scholarship / performance. At-risk services are provided by the SchoolSocial Workersfor students who are recommended for social-emotional support, AIS and initial evaluations for Special Education testing. The services provided include individual counseling of students for at least one or two sessions per week based on need. The social workers collaborate with outside agencies in order to provide any assistance that can benefit the student. 6  In addition, the school social workers assist parents with understanding their due process rights when having their child tested for special education services. Starting September 2018and ending June 2019, students are assigned health-related support annually, via the medical 504 process, or as stated on students’ IEPs; and where appropriate, academic support in the classroom setting. Health paraprofessionals travel with assigned students and safeguard students’ welfare throughout the entire school day. Additionally, during the 2018-2019 academic school year, nurse services are provided to students, [as identified through the completion of the Medication Administration Form (MAF) by parents and doctors], assisting at-risk health students with regard to the daily administration of medicine. 7  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 136 students as indicated on ATS (RATH). 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Funding will be used to purchase gym uniforms, coats, shoes, pay for school-related fees, instructional support materials, i.e. Regents Review books, lab manuals, school trip fees, emergency food or personal supplies, etc. Guidance counselors will meet with students (and parents if needed) and ascertain current need. Consistent outreach is conducted to record any changes and to provide guidance outreach with regard to individual counseling, academic advisement and college and career readiness activities via Naviance. Meetings will be documented/recorded on ILOG and messages will be sent via Skedula and mailings. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 8  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 9  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified.  We access candidates for vacancies or new positions via the Open Market, through New Visions Talent Acquisition Team, attending job fairs, and recruiting through networking and hosting student teachers. In addition, we have hosted Urban Teacher Residents who become viable candidates for subsequent vacancies.  We retain staff by providing a supportive environment that is safe for both students and staff. Supervisors are focused on developing teachers to succeed with all students and success moves both staff and students forward.  We will provide opportunities for staff to attend external professional development, take classes to gain dual certification, especially in the area of ENL and Bilingual, and host learning opportunities at FHHS.  We have a Professional Development Committee made up of representatives from each department who assess staff PD needs and coordinate with supervisors and administrators to provide workshops or other means to meet those needs.  We have six academic coaches dedicated to supporting staff developing or strengthening pedagogical skills, assisting with curriculum refinements, and facilitating the PD Committee.  We have also purchased laptop computers to loan to families in need. This resource will be utilized by the student to complete work that requires a computer. In addition, the parent will be able to use the computer to access PupilPath to monitor their child's performance and communicate with teachers and other staff. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Instructional Support from New Visions and Affinity Group  Participating in Lead Higher Initiative that includes Professional Development   Assistant Principals provide Professional Development  Academic Coaches provide mentoring support to individual teachers, teacher teams, and respective departments.  Professional Development Committee.  Attending conferences or workshops to learn new strategies.  Using protocols for Teacher and Inquiry Teams to effectively use data to drive decision making.  Conduct cycles of intervisitation to learn best practices. 0  Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). NA 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction.  Faculty meetings, Department meetings, teacher teams, and ICT partnerships are utilized to have teachers participate in multiple assessment measures.  We also have a school-wide Professional Development Committee as well as interdisciplinary teams focused  on post-secondary readiness, attendance, and our ELL and ISS students. Leadership meet and visit with teachers and other staff members informally and formally and share input in cabinet meetings. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. 1  Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5A to 5D N/A 5A to 5D 2A 5A to 5D Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 2,918,497 N/A 85,710 43,950 27,203,896 X N/A X X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH). 2   Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 3  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Fort Hamilton High School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. We also keep families informed with our online grade book and communication system (PupilPath), phone blasts and email every two weeks, monthly flyers, etc. We are hosting additional workshops of interest to engage families more with the school and how they can support their child (college process, financial literacy, conflict resolution, anti-stress, CPR/AED, social media, etc.). Fort Hamilton High School will support all parents and families using Title I funds by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy skills, math materials and the use of technology, and progress reports via PupilPath;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children through PupilPath workshops and Parent-Teacher Conferences; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress with parent-teacher conferences and regular communication via phone messages and email; 4   providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments, FHHS   provides parents with information on Regents preparation, requirements for diplomas, tutoring, and college preparation, through presentations, PupilPath, and Naviance; sharing school news and information on Fort Hamilton High School website; sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand through PupilPath, workshops and in-person and phone conferences. FHHS also maintains multi-lingual staff to assist with communication;  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Fort Hamilton High School's Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. FHHS will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the FHHS Parent -Teacher Association, as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: Parental Involvement and School Quality  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact, through PTA meetings and utilizing the school web site to improve the amount of information available to parents and students, especially translation information for ELL families;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills through activities such as parent workshops on the college process, student stress, anxiety, mental disorders and depression. FHHS also will inform parents of FHHS planned initiatives with their children in these same areas through physical education classes;   ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in FHHS' Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent-Teacher Association and Title I Parent Advisory Council. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office. conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home. FHHS has also begun a laptop home loan program for Title I parents so they can follow their children's progress at home via PupilPath;  5   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system,student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed with help from the Departments of Education's free translation services; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their child's academic skill needs and what parents can do to help through grade level workshops, translated for ELL parents to better understand.     provide purchased laptop computers to loan to families in need. This resource will be utilized by the students to complete work that requires a computer. In addition, the parent will be able to use the computer to access PupilPath to monitor their child's performance and communicate with teachers and other staff. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by:  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year by instituting various workshops, athletic tournaments, performances, etc.;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent-Teacher Association, and  Title I Parent Advisory Council by nomination and vote; supporting or hosting community events such as Blood Drives, Respect for All Ceremony, senior citizen prom, toy and food drives, etc., FHHS will encourage care for Title I community members;  establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents, Title I will provide books for parents to support workshop topics;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers, FHHS will use PupilPath and social media to communicate the need for parents volunteers for school day trips and as fundraisers for the PTA;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are given to families six (6) times a year to inform them of their child’s progress, through student grade reports, through PupilPath and through Parent-Teacher conference meeting days;  developing and distributing a monthly newsletter/web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand, FHHS distributes planners to all students. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Fort Hamilton High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve NYS and NYC Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 6  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;  using academic learning time efficiently;    offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships     conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to October 30th of each school year for all parents to inform them of the school's Tiitle I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education, FHHS will provide parent contact information to the DOE so parents may receive translations of important documents and information about interpretation services. We also effectively utilize bilingual staff.  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities to parents in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand with the use of messages, email via PupilPath, and monthly flyers; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;   providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed at our monthly PTA meeting and discussed with parents each year; - Title I news will be an agenda item at all PTA meetings - reports will be made to parents and ideas solicited; - at every FHHS event (drama, band, multicultural) where parents attend, Title I information and flyers will be made available. Receptions may be planned before these events to gather ideas for parent workshops; - at the Parent fair, FHHS will host workshops for parents on student academic skills; - during Parent-Teacher Conference days, FHHS will determine if a workshop can be offered to parents, oriented to each grade year. Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents by use of on-site interpreters;;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; 7   arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences, PTA meetings, school events; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents    creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as   described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; FHHS provides the loan of a limited number of school-owned laptop computers to Title I families to support families collaboration in school preparation with their children at home. In addition, the laptop can be used to communicate with the school and follow their child's progress on PupilPath. II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent, using PupilPath, notes and contact with the Parent Coordinator;  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; set limits to the amount of time my child watches television, plays video games, or accesses social media;    promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;   participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  communicate with my child’s teachers about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;   become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies. Whenever possible, FHHS will plan workshops on strategies, especially for parents of ELL and Disabled children when information is made available from the DOE or NYS; take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Advisory Council, School or District Leadership Teams; share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child.   8  III. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities attend school regularly and arrive on time; complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions;     engage with peers to discuss and generate questions re: topic - show respect for self, other people and property; try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; always try my best to learn;    engage with staff and peers in extra-curricular activities that provide additional learning opportunities and positive social interactions. 9  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 0  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: We have approximately 700 Entitled English Language Learners in our school, as well as 170-200 students who have scored "Commanding" on the NYSESLAT in the last two years. Our population is at many different levels of proficiency. Currently, our largest percentage of ELLs are at the Expanding level. These students struggle primarily with reading comprehension, multiple choice test-taking skills and writing skills. This affects their ability to achieve successful scores on standardized exams. We currently have approximately 107 ELLs in the 2019 cohort who are scheduled to take the Common Core ELA Regents Examination in January and approximately 164 ELLs the 2020 cohort taking the exam in June. In order to work with these students (and any other member of our ELL population in need of additional support) to address their needs and help them succeed academically, we will provide additional instruction outside of the students' regular school day. Direct instruction will occur outside of the students' regular school day in after school and Saturday programs. Content and ENL teachers will be working with small groups of students to improve their writing and reading comprehension skills. Teachers will be using a variety of instructional strategies in the small-group setting, including flexible and meaningful grouping, structured pair work and inter-disciplinary collaboration. The teachers will utilize programs such as Achieve 3000, have the students working in discussion circles, and incorporate formal academic writing using the Hochman Method of Teaching Basic Writing Skills . Students will be working on writing prompts, exam-aligned tasks and various projects. Materials will be supplemental to daily instruction, but teachers will also support students by providing assistance with daily coursework when necessary. Certification of 11 content area providers include Social Studies(2), and Science (1 Earth Science and 1 Living Environment) ELA/ENL instruction will be delivered by 3 certified ENL teachers. This instruction will occur in English in the areas of ENL, science and social studies, however, home language support is always available. Methods of home language support range from availability of word to word dictionaries, content-related bilingual glossaries and instruction delivered by bilingual staff. Instruction will be in small groups and will occur after school 3 hours per week (2/90 min. sessions per week for 4 days, Monday through Thursday from 10/15-6/16) and on Saturdays for 2-3 hours each week for both the Fall and Spring terms. The nine Fall term Saturday Academy sessions will be (insert dates when we finalize Saturday calendar). The ten Spring term Saturday Academy dates are still being determined. We will also have instruction in math (from 3 certified Math teachers) to help improve students' math skills, particularly in math literacy, in alignment with the Common Core Learning Standards. Content teachers will employ technology to help ENL students better connect with the material. This instruction may include accessing websites for interactive lessons; creating research projects; virtual classrooms, etc. We will also continue our "Homework Help Cafe" after school program, in which ENL and content teachers provide a quiet space, computer access and assistance to ELLs with school 1  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information assignments. Teachers also provide students with conversation prompts to help practice speaking skills. Homework Help Cafe will take place after school, 90 min. per day, Monday-Friday. We will continue to employ Inside Broadway or similar organization as an outside vendor to work with ENL students to improve their skills in all modalities. In addition to using song and dance from popular Broadway shows to improve expression, a teaching artist will also incorporate close readings of dialogue as a way to help improve reading comprehension and writing skills for students Students will also learn about careers in theatre. The program will run for 8 weeks and will also have 1-2 licensed ENL and HLA/LOTE teachers to oversee the program. ENL classes will continue to be grouped by proficiency and content classes will be grouped by need for intervention. Class size will vary but remain smaller than daily classes. Teachers will keep track of attendance through sign-in sheets. Program availability and notification will always be in parents' preferred languages. Information will be made available through posted fliers, backpacked letters and through PupilPath. By providing a combination of methods to address the students' various learning styles and academic needs, we believe students will be able to achieve greater success in their classrooms, on high stakes examinations, and be able to show overall gains in school, leading to an improved graduation rate, and better college and career readiness. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: ENL and Content area teachers will continue to work collaboratively to enhance instruction and improve learning for ELLs. A team of ENL teachers will meet weekly to share new instructional strategies and techniques and review current research, data, and trends related to ELL achievement, bilingual education and academic progress. The World Languages/ENL Assistant Principal, Jill Kitchen, the ENL Instructional Coach, Jessica Guerrero, and the ENL Coordinator, Kristen Proscia, will collaborate on an annual professional development series aimed at content-area teachers working with ELLs. All providers hold ENL certification (among others), are certified mentors and are equipped to provide a variety of information, strategies, assistance and resources to staff. Any staff member participating in the Title III supplemental program will be required to attend, These 90 minute sessions held December 12th 2018, various sessions throughout the day during Regents Week January 2019 (to accommodate teacher proctoring schedules) and March 13th 2019, include topics such as the English Language Learner Identification process (though not directly related to Title III, this information is valuable to any teacher working with English Language Learners and communicating with ELL families), the laws that govern ELL education, the impact of cultural awareness on teaching and learning and how to access available school resources and information pertaining to ELLs. Other sessions include an abundance of information on ELL instructional strategies in the areas of vocabulary building, establishing routines, engaging ELLs in meaningful conversations and differentiating reading and writing tasks. All sessions include PD topics, such as those listed above, that help teachers to directly impact student achievement. 2  Part C: Professional Development ENL teachers and Content Area Bilingual teachers (Math/Science/Social Studies) working in the Title III Program will also be part of a participate in focused professional development sessions. These meetings will last approximately one hour and will be held each month from October to June. The ENL instructional coach will meet with teachers individually or in small groups as needed, and participate in inter-visitation with content and ENL teachers to provide feedback and methodology to help improve instruction to ELLs. Topics to be covered include, but are not limited to: strategies for presenting content-specific, academic vocabulary to ELLS; incorporating Judith Hochman’s Basic Writing Skills strategies into subject specific lessons; interpreting and understanding NYSESLAT proficiency scores/Examining exam samplers; differentiating instruction for struggling students with Multiple Entry Points; discussing current research, data and trends related to bilingual education; reviewing goals of Transitional Bilingual Education programs. Those facilitating workshops will also seek opportunities for outside professional development when possible. Our ENL Coordinator will also lead a bilingual interdisciplinary teacher team that will meet twice weekly to examine student work through various inquiry protocols, and develop instructional interventions based on need. The members of the bilingual team include instructors from the after school supplemental instruction program. Agendas and attendance sheets will be maintained. Professional development component will be partially provided for by the Title III program funds but will also be supplemented by other school tax levy funds. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parent engagement is crucial in the success of our students, particularly our ELLs, however, we continue to have challenges in connecting our parents to the school community. We plan on conducting outreach to our parents/families to determine their needs and when they are available for us to help meet their needs. Our initial outreach will be through a letter that is backpacked with the students and a translated phone blast. Teachers will review the purpose of the letters so the students can explain our goal to their families. Translation needs of parents are always considered here at Fort Hamilton. In addition to letters and information related to the Title III program, all school communication with families is made available in preferred languages through direct memo translation, links in preferred languages to translation on our school website, PupilPath and translated phone messages. We also have translation headsets available for important school meetings, with qualified staff doing simultaneous interpretation when available. Workshops, such as "How to use Skedula/Pupil Path to Help Your Child Succeed" will continue to be offered in different languages. We will advertise these meetings through phone blasts, targeted phone calls by bilingual staff and through backpacked letters written in the home languages. Workshops will be conducted by teachers and other qualified staff who speak the 3  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities languages whenever possible. Other staff members and student volunteers will be on hand to assist parents/guardians in logging into the system and navigating the program. We anticipate we will need to conduct the Pupil Path workshops several times during the year: November, January, and March. We also plan to pursue additional partnerships with community based organizations, such as the Arab American Association, which has hosted "Know Your Rights" forums for immigrant students. While families are in attendance for various school meetings, we poll parents to learn about resources and topics they would like to see made available to them. Our expectations include classes on how to navigate the internet, cultural enrichment, and assisting with monitoring their children's academic progress through PupilPath. We anticipate several student activities, including our annual Multicultural Show, and culminating musical performances from the students' work with Inside Broadway. A sample schedule would be: September-October: Parent questionnaireregarding needs presented at September 19th PTA meeting; 1st session of Skedula/Pupil Path training (Bilingual staff available for interpretation) November-December: Continue looking at parent/guardian needs and availability for meetings; Additional sessions of Skedula/Pupil Path Training (November 7th, 5:00-7:00 P.M./Chinese and Spanish) January-February: additional sessions of Skedula/Pupil Path training (Chinese/Spanish); begin parent/guardian workshops based on need and interest (topics many include: Skedula/Pupil Path; using the internet; cyber bullying, preparation for the NYSESLAT, regents, SAT and graduation requirements, etc.) March-April: Multicultural Festival; Representatives from organizations such as the Arab American Association to counsel parents and students on various topics including choosing the right college, immigration issues, and serve as a local resource for immigrant families; parent workshops based on need and interest; college visit (encourage parent/guardian participation); NYSESLAT celebration (encourage parent participation) May-June: Parent workshops (based on need and interest) Providers include bilingual guidance counselors, (Dennis Lee, Maisa Bader ), Assistant Principal, Jill Kitchen (licensed ENL teacher), ENL and HLA teachers (Gennady Ladnik, Jessica Guerrero, Christine Kawar, Joanne Zhen and Sergio Mendoza) Parent Coordinator, Lisa Lynch and other staff members (bilingual school aides)interested in assisting. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) N/A  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum N/A Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A N/A 4  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 5  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 20 School Name Fort Hamilton High School Borough Brooklyn School Number 490 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Kaye Houlihan Coach Jessica Guerrero/ENL ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Lauren Fitzgerald Teacher/Subject Area Milady Morales/Social Studies Teacher/Subject Area Susanna Cheng/Chinese Related-Service Provider Jasmine Infante-Cruz Superintendent Donald Conyers Assistant Principal Jill Kitchen Coach Kristen Proscia/ISS, ENL/ELA School Counselor Dennis Lee Parent Dina Ganjemi Parent Coordinator Lisa Lynch Field Support Center Staff Member Ana Vasquez Other (Name and Title) Gennady Ladnik/ENL/SS/ISS C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 8 5 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 15 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 6 2 D. Student Demographics 6  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 4624 Total number of ELLs 696 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 15.05% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Arabic, Chinese, Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 3 2 4 Lang. Arabic Spanish Chinese Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 0 0 0 0 9 23 61 48 10 34 41 48 132 123 11 19 17 44 80 12 8 6 20 34 Tot # 84 125 160 0 0 0 369 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Teachers use a variety of assessments to guide instructional planning for ELLs, including the San Diego Quick Assessment, teacher created writing assessments and baseline assessments created for each level in ENL/ELA classes. The baseline assessments help teachers determine areas of focus for each group of students. Students are also given focused diagnostics that emphasize specific skills, such as reading comprehension and multiple choice response questions. ENL teachers use Achieve3000 level-set and online differentiated instruction with ongoing assessment to assess reading Lexile level of ELLs throughout the year. ELLs are also assessed in content area classes through formative, baseline Regents-based assessments throughout the year. Students are also monitored through portfolio and progress folders. 7  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Teachers are programmed, when possible, with common planning time and work collaboratively in teams to create, revise and evaluate results of baseline assessments. Specific teacher teams, through an inquiry based model, work collaboratively to evaluate and examine student work and develop strategies to address areas of focus. Professional development opportunities are provided to assist with use of online programs and other important instructional strategies. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Baseline/benchmark assessments include the NYSESLAT, the San Diego Quick Assessment, teacher created writing assessments and baseline assessments created for each level in ENL/ELA classes. The baseline assessments help teachers determine areas of focus for each group of students. Other benchmark assessments include teacher made diagnostics, such as a reading comprehension/multiple choice assessment created by our Expanding level teacher team. These focused diagnostics inform instruction, and provide teachers with data to assist in designing interventions to address specific areas of need for groups of students. Summative assessments include school-created mid-term and final exams, summative unit assessments such as argumentative and text-based writing tasks, HLA assessments (including the Chinese Reading Test, HLA Spanish Performance Assessment, AP Chinese and Spanish exams and various Regents examinations. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Fort Hamilton has a variety of structures in place to address interventions. Summative data is frequently examined by both teachers and administration. Inquiry teams are formed to look at and target specific target groups of students, and action plans are created based upon need. Early in the year, ENL teachers examine NYSESLAT modality scores to inform curricular and unit revisions. Teacher teams are supported in examining student baseline, formative and summative data in order to create specific interventions. Some teams have worked with a Teacher Development Coach to use protocols for looking at student work. Other teams have participated in lesson study and interschool collaborative learning through the Learning Partners Program. Some interventions created include focused and close reading strategies, new lesson development with clearer emphasis on student-generated questioning and critical thinking, test taking strategies, focused tutoring and curriculum revision. An ELL inquiry team has focused on other needs discovered from looking at student data including scholarship and attendance. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Outcome assessment data is used extensively to evaluate ELLs and inform program. NYSESLAT data, gathered through the use of ATS reports is used to program students accordingly. In addition to using ELL assessment data, other results including 8th grade ELA and Math scores are used to inform programming of incoming freshmen. Regents data of current students influences ELL programming as well. Cohort juniors who are scheduled to take the ELA Regents Examination are scheduled for a support class that targets specific areas of need and focus. Modality reports provide teachers with more specific information about individual students. The ELL Data Analysis Tool is used to look at achievement data of ELLs and measure progress toward increased student success and English proficiency. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Collaborative teacher team meetingsAn ENL Instructional Coach and ENL Coordinator in charge of monitoring data and working with teachers to interpret data and make appropriate curricular revisionsAP Data and Compliance who works closely with teachers, administration and ENL Coordinator to monitor, interpret and disseminate information to teachersWe utilize Google Sheets to share information school wide 8  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. English Language Learners receive the New York State-mandated Stand-Alone ENL/Integrated ENL allotted instruction time based on student proficiency level. Students scoring "Entering" on the NYSESLAT are programmed for two periods (Stand-Alone ENL and Integrated ENL/ELA Instruction.) "Entering" students also receive one period of Integrated ENL in the Social Studies Content with a licensed ENL teacher working with the Social Studies teacher. Students scoring "Emerging" are programmed for two periods (Stand-Alone ENL and Integrated ELA Instruction.) Though not mandated for Stand-Alone ENL, students scoring "Transitioning" are programmed for two periods (Stand Alone ENL and Integrated ENL/ELA Instruction) to provide students with needed language acquisition support. Students at the "Expanding" level are programmed for one period of Integrated ENL/ELA instruction. Integrated ENL/ELA instruction is delivered by dually certified teachers or a licensed ELA teacher and licensed ENL teacher working together, whenever possible. In the content area, ELLs of Entering and Emerging proficiency are grouped together, where teachers can address student needs with ELL instructional strategies. Expanding students are integrated with other mainstream students in content area classes, but teachers are provided with specific targeted professional development with an emphasis on considerations and instructional strategies for working with English Language Learners. b. TBE program. If applicable. Those who have selected a TBE program receive the mandated ENL instruction, in addition to Home Language classes (45 minutes per day) and a minimum of two bilingual content area courses when available. These content area courses are heterogeneously grouped. c. DL program. If applicable. N/A: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? All students receive at least the minimum mandated number of instructional minutes according to proficiency levels in both program models. In many cases students receive more language instruction than the number minutes mandated, but based upon instructional need. English Language Learners receive the New York State-mandated Stand-Alone ENL/Integrated ENL allotted instruction time based on student proficiency level. Students scoring "Entering" on the NYSESLAT are programmed for two periods (Stand-Alone ENL and Integrated ENL/ELA Instruction.) "Entering" students also receive one period of Integrated ENL in the Social Studies Content with a licensed ENL teacher working with the Social Studies teacher. Students scoring "Emerging" are programmed for two periods (Stand-Alone ENL and Integrated ELA Instruction.) Though not mandated for Stand-Alone ENL, students scoring "Transitioning" are programmed for two periods (Stand Alone ENL and Integrated ENL/ELA Instruction) to provide students with needed language acquisition support. Students at the "Expanding" level are programmed for one period of Integrated ENL/ELA instruction. Integrated ENL/ELA instruction is delivered by dually certified teachers or a licensed ELA teacher and licensed ENL teacher working together, whenever possible. In the content area, ELLs of Entering and Emerging proficiency are grouped together, where teachers can address student needs with ELL instructional strategies. Expanding students are integrated with other mainstream students in content area classes, but teachers are provided with specific 9  targeted professional development with an emphasis on considerations and instructional strategies for working with English Language Learners. Those who have selected a TBE program receive the mandated ENL instruction, in addition to Home Language classes (45 minutes per day) and a minimum of two bilingual content area courses when available. These content area courses are heterogeneously grouped. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In TBE programs, instruction in Home Language (Chinese, Spanish and Arabic) and English in Math, Science and Social Studies is allocated as follows: for Entering students-instruction may begin at 100% in home language but will transition to 60:40; Emerging and Transitioning will begin at 75% in home language but will transition to 50:50; and Expanding- 25:75 during a 45 minute instructional period. However, students performing at different levels of language proficiency may be enrolled in the same level-content area class. In order to meet the diverse learning needs of all students, bilingual teachers provide differentiated instruction by implementing ENL instructional techniques in addition to the following instructional strategies: paired and small group cooperative learning, choral repetition drills, vocabulary building activities, word walls, ...etc. Teachers have also worked collaboratively across content areas to develop lessons and activities that are differentiated through the use of multiple entry points. In addition, teachers consider cultural and linguistic differences while teaching the content area curricula. Students in an ENL only program are grouped together in core content classes at the Entering, Emerging and Transitioning levels. Instruction in these classes also includes similar ENL instructional strategies and techniques to make content comprehensible and to foster language development and peer-to-peer conversation. A school-wide focus on literacy and annotating text helps all students meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards and high-expectations. Additional support in Social Studies is offered through Integrated ENL by having certified ENL teachers work in an integrated setting with Social Studies teachers. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Home language development and proficiency of ELLs are evaluated through initial assessment exams in Home Language courses (offered in Arabic, Chinese, Spanish) as well as the annual administration and evaluation of scores on the Chinese Reading test and HLA Spanish Performance Assessment, the AP Spanish Language and Culture examination and the AP Chinese Language and Culture examination. Ongoing evaluation of students' speaking, reading, and writing skills is conducted through formative and summative assessment, including unit examinations, writing assignments, projects, as well as mid-term and final exams. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Newly arrived students or students from other neighboring schools who have interrupted formal education (SIFE) as determined by the MLS are interviewed and enrolled in appropriate ENL classes (according to proficiency)and support classes (language skills and assessments) in which instruction is differentiated to meet the specific needs of the students. Many SIFE students are illiterate in their home language and lack social skills. Students are closely monitored by their guidance counselors. Instruction focuses on the teaching of phonics, vocabulary development and expansion. We have implemented technology in daily lessons which afford students the opportunity to practice their listening and speaking skills. We also provide dual language classroom libraries, bilingual dictionaries and glossaries.We apply for Title III academic intervention grants to provide additional support to our struggling students. Support includes after school intervention, additional instructional materials and the implementation of Achieve3000 (A lexile based online reading/writing program.) 0  Our Newcomers class is intended to meet the needs of our newly arrived students who enter Fort Hamilton with little or no prior English language instruction. These students are programmed for an Entering level Newcomers ENL class for the year. They need additional support and attention in order to succeed academically and meet the standards. Special consideration is given to help the new students feel welcomed and to adjust to their new surroundings. Students meet with bilingual counselors to set educational goals and programs. They are also encouraged to schedule additional tutoring with ENL teachers. Intervention strategies include collaborative teaching, individual and small instruction via differentiated activities. Language proficiency and growth is assessed through analyzing scholarship and performance on the NYSESLAT. Students are then programmed for the approprate level for the following instructional year. Students who are receiving services from four to six need additional support which is provided through approprate programming, one-on-one conferencing with ENL teachers and tutoring. ELA classroom libraries are available in all classrooms. All collections include a variety of fiction, non-fiction, and an assortment of appropriate reading levels. Also included are reading materials in home languages. Achieve3000, offered in Spanish and English affords the students additional support as they engage in the web-based activities before, during, and after school. Students are also encouraged to use Pupil Path to communicate with teachers, organize and keep informed of assignments. Parents are also encouraged to sign up to take an active role in monitoring their child’s education and learning. Students who continue to be identified as ELLs after six years of service (Long-Term ELL) are recommended for participation in tutorials and credit recovery courses as needed. Cohort seniors who are LTE and programmed for classes below Transitioning levels are programmed for a language skills support class. Instruction focuses on vocabulary development and expansion, reading comprehension, critical thinking skills and test taking strategies. In addition, students participate in the Achieve 3000 program in English and Spanish. Students in Chinese and Spanish Bilingual classes who continue with home language study are programmed for Advanced Placement Chinese or Spanish Language in which they are able to receive college credit. Home Language instruction focuses on reinforcing the language skills necessary for students to succeed on all exams, to assist in gaining language proficiency, and to improve scholarship in all classes. Students who scored Commanding on the NYSESLAT within the last two years continue to receive testing accommodations and are offered additional support through programming (literacy blocks and elective classes taught by certified ENL/content teachers) as well as tutoring. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Instructional Support Students/ELLs/SWD entering at the 9th grade level are immediately assessed to determine their reading, writing and language acquisition abilities. In many cases these students are delayed in these areas due to learning disabilities rather than a lack of language acquisition. Some strategies and programs used to enhance ENL instruction in Self-Contained classes include Wilson, Rewards, Collaborative Strategic Reading, Hochman Basic Writing, Academic Vocabulary Toolkit, Achieve3000 and Newsela. Students are provided with "visuals" to assist with word recognition through technology and frequent use of a SMART Board. Instruction is also aligned with preparation for NYSESLAT and Regents examinations. In addition, an ISS Literacy Coach works with all teachers (and the ENL Instructional coach) in order to address the literacy needs of our students. Our ENL Coordinator is also licensed in ELA, TESOL and Special Education. She collaborates with our ELL Instructional Coach to create high quality professional development to assist teachers in providing effective instructional strategies to ELLs/SWD. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Students who require alternative placement in special education classes are assigned Alternative Placement Paraprofessionals who speak the students’ home language. The students’ needs are met as the paraprofessional accompanies the student providing language support and addresses his/her academic deficits and delays (cognitive and language). These delays are also addressed in the self-contained classroom. Due to smaller class size in conjunction with the special needs of the ISS student, instruction is tailored to the diverse levels of ability and comprehension. This is accompanied by the implementation of various differentiated learning tasks. Examples of differentiated tasks include the use of different levels of vocabulary, reading comprehension passages and questions and a widely diverse array of reading samples in one classroom library. Students are 1  programed according to their best ability and in the least restrictive environment possible. Instruction is also provided via ICT classes. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ELLs are encouraged to take part in tutorials and special academic intervention programs geared towards helping them meet the standards. Saturday Academy (Math, Science, Social Studies and ELA) and test preparation tutorial programs are provided. Parental participation/registration on Pupil Path is encouraged to help parents take an active role in their child's learning . This program may be translated into many languages. Bilingual guidance counselors (Spanish, Arabic and Chinese) work closely with students to monitor academic progress. Group guidance lessons are provided to all ELLs addition to one-on-one counseling. Newcomers are provided with lessons geared toward promoting social-emotional growth in addition to academic achievement. Developing and Long-term ELLs are supported through language skills classes and guidance supervision. Additional after school intervention and support is also provided through the Title III ELL grant. We continue to use Achieve3000 for Emerging, Transitioning and Expanding ELLs in addition to Newsela to enhance literacy skills. Classroom libraries and word-to-word dictionaries in target languages are available in all classrooms in order to promote literacy skills of all ELLs. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? This year we will implement more Hochman writing strategies and Question Formulating Technique and Question Answer Relationship strategies to more of the ELL population. We need to continue to expose ELLs to more high-frequency academic vocabulary used across core content areas. More ENL teachers will be trained in Hochman strategies for teaching basic writing. The ENL Instructional Coach is also implementing sharing a focused reading strategy developed after cycles of examining student work, focused on having students read content specific texts with greater success. We continue to expand our use of technology and offer more parental outreach and training with Pupil Path in Chinese, Spanish and Arabic. We are also creating an additional elective class for former ELLs, titled Cultural Literature, for support in close reading and college writing. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs have equal access to all extra-curricular, guidance, support, and remedial services that are made available to all students at Fort Hamilton High School. Information regarding diploma/graduation requirements has been translated into target languages. Students identify and revise SMART instructional goals throughout the school year. Students are afforded the opportunity to enroll in College Now courses which provide an opportunity for college credit. The courses provide college selection and career exploration guidance. Instruction is provided after the students’ regular schedule. Throughout the school year, ELLs participate in Junior ROTC, sports programs and monthly cultural club activities. Student participation in our annual Multicultural Festival has been very high as students join together to celebrate their diverse cultures and talents. We will continue to have our Inside Broadway program, where ELLs work with a Broadway teaching artist to develop skills of expression. Additionally, parent participation in learning is encouraged. Orientation and technology workshops are offered (with translators) to assist parents in taking an active role in their child’s education. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Examples of the strategies/materials including technology employed to promote student’s skills include Achieve3000 (in English and Spanish), NewsEla, Hochman strategies for basic writing, SMART boards, laptop projectors, mobile laptop labs; Academic Vocabulary Toolkit, Question Formulating Technique; scaffolding strategies; differentiated Instruction; small group work; and tutoring and extended-day support. Word to word dictionaries/glossaries and home language materials and resources are available to students in core content area and ENL classes. ENL, ELA, HLA, ISS and Content area teachers engage in Teacher Team Meetings to discuss and share strategies and techniques. 2  13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is provided in many classes as the many of our teachers are multilingual. Teachers are able to support students’ learning of the home language and English in bilingual and ENL content area classes. CR-Part 154 mandates that instruction using HLA support be available to all students. The percentile for HLA support is never zero. Students in Chinese and Spanish Home Language Arts are offered the opportunity to take the Advanced Placement course in Chinese or Spanish. Bilingual classroom libraries and dictionaries are available in all classes. Content specific glossaries are provided to ELLs during instruction whenever available. Instruction is aligned with English Language Arts in order to prepare for exams. The goal is that students are able to transfer language skills to English, thereby enabling students to succeed on the ELA Regents and other exams. Spanish Home Language Arts is also offered. Students participate in the Achieve3000 Spanish web-based program. Arabic support is provided through HLA classes and by ENL and Content-area teachers and paraprofessionals who speak Arabic. Bilingual guidance counselors are available to advise students, communicate with parents and monitor progress 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required support services and resources correspond to students’ ages and grade levels. Instructional materials, textbooks and readers are age-appropriate. Since many of our classes are heterogeneous, we ensure that students receive differentiated instruction. A larger number of TBE content area classes are available at the freshman and sophomore level. The demand decreases as students advance through each grade and more students test Commanding. Many students also transition into different programs (changing parent choice to an ENL only program) after feeling more confident and acquiring language skills. Junior and senior ELLs are invited to participate in college fairs. The college office provides college selection and career exploration guidance. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Prior to registering at Fort Hamilton High School, all students from local schools are invited along with their parents, for Welcome Night. Students receive the school handbook, information about available programs, school newsletters, a copy of our school newspaper, a welcome letter from the principal, bell schedule and other pertinent information. Students also meet some the staff and tour the school. Students and parents have the opportunity to ask questions. Workshops (with translators) for parents of ELLs are offered. Some of these workshops have included information regarding Pupil Path registration and immigration law. Community based organizations have partnered with Fort Hamilton and have presented information helpful to ELLs. The ENL Coordinator, ENL Instructional Coach and other trained pedagogues interview all “over-the-counter” admits who enroll prior to the opening of school (during the last week of August). The intake process includes completion of the Home Language Information Survey, distribution of Parent Guidelines translated into respective languages, individual interviews, administration of NYSITELL and native language placement tests for eligible students, and timely programming to avoid gaps in instructional time. The Spanish LAB test is administered to all newly-arrived students from Spanish speaking countries. The same process is carried out throughout the school year to assist newly enrolled ELLs. The parent coordinator acts as a liason to all families, providing access to translation for ELL parents when necessary. Various workshops are offered in parents’ home languages, to foster ELL parental involvement. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? All ELL students enrolled in TBE classes are required to study their home language. Students may continue after language requirements are satisfied and take Advanced Placement classes in Chinese. Students also have the opportunity to study a second language provided they have room in their daily schedule. The language electives are Chinese, French, Italian, Greek, and Spanish. ELLs are also able to take a variety of English Language Arts electives, including but not limited to Public Speaking, Cultural Literature and College Writing. 3  18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? In-house and off-site Professional Development workshops are offered to the entire faculty during city-wide scheduled Professional Development Days. These workshops focus on strategies and methodologies for technology-infused, differentiated instruction, improving academic vocabulary, ELL instructional strategies and cultural considerations, strengthening literacy skills and argumentative writing, annotating texts and creating meaningful writing tasks. Throughout the year, members of the World Languages/ENL Department have the opportunity to attend Professional Development workshops and/or other training relevant to ENL/Common Core instruction; these teachers turn-key what they learn to other staff within the school. Teachers are also required to attend monthly department meetings and faculty conferences. Topics for these sessions are announced as the term progresses. Teachers participate in Teacher Team Meetings and Interdisciplinary teams with a school wide literacy focus. In addition, teachers of ELLs are encouraged to attend workshops/conferences offered by the support offices. New teachers participate in monthly New Teacher Workshops which focus on topics such as Classroom Management, Lesson Planning, ELL Identification and Instructional Strategies for SWD and ELLs. Bilingual content teachers work closely with ENL teachers to develop effective strategies for student engagement and differentation. Secretaries and other support staff have attended workshops related to ATS, registration and the ELL Identification Process. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. ENL, Home Language Arts, and Content Area teachers continue to work cooperatively and collaboratively (with all staff) to discuss and share instructional strategies and techniques that help students to meet the standards and acquire the skills necessary to succeed and graduate with their cohort. Teachers review student performance on the NYSESLAT, Chinese Reading and HLA Spanish Performance assessment, and other exams in order to plan for appropriate level and personalized instruction that addresses the individual academic needs of each student, some of which are “at risk”. Teachers are trained in Datacation (Skedula/Pupil Path). ENL teachers receive training in the implementation and analysis of data provided by the Achieve3000 Differentiated Reading program. ENL teachers receive training regarding new ELL mandates and NYSESLAT administration. ALL teachers in the school receive training and information regarding the ELL Identification Process and NYSESLAT proficiency levels. It is always our goal to continue to enhance collaboration between content area teachers, ENL and Bilingual teachers through collaborative teacher teams and work with Teacher Development Coaches. Collaborative teacher teams consisting of ENL, content area bilingual teachers and teachers of students with SWD's have worked together to develop an online toolkit of instructional strategies for engagement and differentiation. Records of professional development meetings are kept with agendas, attendance sheets and decision sheets where minutes are recorded. A school wide professional development log is kept in the Principal's office. Since Fort Hamilton has such a large ELL population, most professional development includes an ELL application or focus accounting for more than 15% of total professional development hours for all content area teachers and 50% of total professional development hours for bilingual/ENL instructors. Our ENL Instructional Coach frequently works with core content area teachers to provide ELL specific professional development and support. 4  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parental outreach is made by all teachers including teachers of English Language Learners with the support of the Parent Coordinator in order to increase parental involvement in all aspects of the students’ school life. Parents are invited to meet with teachers, guidance counselors, and other staff to discuss progress, programming options and participation in city and state mandated programs. Parents are also able to speak with the school via phone and contact teachers through the Skedula email system. All parental outreach is made in the parents’ target language whenever possible. PupilPath workshops are held in parents’ languages. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. When considering the needs of parents we often look to responses given on the school survey, which is translated into target languages. We also respond to the feedback given by parents during individual meetings, phone calls and through our Skedula email system. Based upon assessment of need, we have recently begun to offer PupilPath workshops to ELL parents, to teach them how to actively monitor their child’s academic progress and communicate with school staff. While ELL parental involvement is often a challenge, we continue to invite parents in for school events, providing translation when necessary. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 5 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Kaye Houlihan, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 6  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Fort Hamilton High School School DBN: 20K490 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Kaye Houlihan Jill Kitchen Lisa Lynch Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Lauren Fitzgerald ENL/Bilingual Teacher Dina Ganjemi Parent Susanna Cheng Teacher/Subject Area Milady Morales Teacher/Subject Area Jessica Guerrero Kristen Proscia/ISS ENL/ ELA Coach Coach Dennis Lee School Counselor Donald Conyers Ana Vasquez Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Affinity ELL Services Administrator N/A Other N/A ENL/ISS/SS Teacher Other 10/26/17 AP Programming Other 10/26/17 Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/26/17 10/26/17 10/26/17 10/26/17 10/26/17 10/26/17 10/26/17 10/26/17 10/26/17 10/26/17 10/26/17 10/26/17 Gennady Ladnik Jeff Brisard 1/1/01 7  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 20K490 School Name: Fort Hamilton High School Superintendent: Donald Conyers The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Lisa Lynch Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The school collects data (including the HLIS) regarding the primary language spoken by the parent/guardian of each newly enrolled student and the parents' preferred language of communication/whether the parent/guardian requires language assistance to communicate with the school . A portion of the HLIS and our own in-house educational history survey also asks the parent their language preference for written and oral communication. This is also confirmed during the registration interview. The ATS report, RPOB, is generated and reviewed to determine/check the home language of students who have come from other schools when the original HLIS is not found in the student's cumulative folder. RAPL is utilized to review and report Adult Preferred languages. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 8  AMHARIC ALBANIAN AMOY ARABIC BENGALI BIHARI CHAM CHINESE ANY CHECHEN CANTONESE FULANI GA GEORGIAN GREEK GERMAN HAITIAN CREOLE HUNGARIAN HINDI ITALIAN KOREAN MOLDAVIAN MANDARIN MOSSI NAHUAT Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 1 53 0 613 24 1 0 0.01 0.66 0 1 56 8 7.65 624 0.3 28 0.01 0 1 2 1620 20.22 1051 1 0 3 1 6 0.01 1 0 160 0.04 0.01 0.07 3 1 6 13 0.16 13 2 7 2 2 0 3 1 0 1 27 0.02 0.09 0.02 0.02 0 0.04 0.01 2 8 2 2 2 3 1 0 401 0.01 0.34 0 26 0.01 0.7 0.1 7.79 0.35 0.01 0.02 13.12 0.01 2 0.04 0.01 0.07 0.16 0.02 0.1 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.04 0.01 5.01 0 0.32 9  ENGLISH PASHTO PILIPINO PUNJABI POLISH PORTUGUESE PAPIAMENTO RUSSIAN SLOVAK SPANISH ASL THAI URDU UKRAINIAN UZBEK VIETNAMESE 3839 47.93 3804 1 2 1 28 6 1 0.01 0.02 0.01 1 2 1 0.35 28 0.07 0.01 5 1 100 1.25 100 2 0.02 2 47.5 0.01 0.02 0.01 0.35 0.06 0.01 1.25 0.02 1551 19.36 1560 19.48 2 3 71 10 1 11 0.02 0.04 0.89 0.12 0.01 0.14 2 3 77 12 1 8 0.02 0.04 0.96 0.15 0.01 0.1 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 0  Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Announcements of meetings and conferences, October and March. We also utilize translated "phone blasts." Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Some documents are translated in-house by staff members. Others are sent out for translation, with an understanding that there is a two week turnaround. If we are unable to provide translation in-house, we will send documents to an outside vendor for translation. We have nor yet experienced a language that can not be covered through use of our diverse multi-lingual staff or translation services. If necessary, we would contact an additional outside contracted vendor to assist. IEP Letters IEP letters are sent out throughout the year. SESIS Translation Continued Entitlement Letters September Use available translated letters After school tutoring and program information, important school letters (including general information and letters regarding entitlement and services, Ongoing Utilize translation from in-house staff and sending out documents for translation when necessary. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to parent teacher conferences and frequent informal interactions with parents including phone calls and conferences with teachers and guidance counselors scheduled as needed. October and March and ongoing provide interpretation service(s)? Our large multilingual staff often assists with translation and interpretation related to parental outreach. We hire interpreters for additional assistance during scheduled parent teacher conferences. 1  Welcome Night for incoming freshman June PTA meetings, Monthly Parent workshops for Skedula (our online data/gradebook/communication system.) October/March Language Access posters and information are displayed prominently in the lobby and in appropriate offices. Qualified staff also assist with translation of materials and interpretation at events Qualified staff also assist with language interpretation when required. Qualified staff also assist with interpretation at events and documents are sent out for translation well before an event is scheduled. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We utilize translated "phone blasts" and translated and interpreted messages via Skedula and Pupil Path to disseminate information quickly. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Language Access posters and information are displayed prominently in the lobby and in appropriate offices. Staff members are made aware of Chancellor's Regulations in faculty meetings and are reminded that translation/interpretation assistance is available, either by contacting the Assistant Principal of the World Languages and English as a New Language Department, Jill Kitchen, who will assist in finding someone who speaks the language needed. Members of this department are proficient in many languages such as Chinese, Arabic, Spanish, Italian, Albanian, French, Korean, Greek and Japanese, among others. If translation and interpretation assistance is not possible in the building when needed, teachers are instructed to use the Language Line for over-the-phone interpretation when necessary. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 2  Chancellor's Regulations A-663 are reviewed by all administrators and supervisors to fulfill parent notification requirements for translation and interpretation services. Language Access posters and information are displayed prominently in the lobby and in appropriate offices. Parents/guardians in need of language services always have access to information and assistance at Fort Hamilton High School. Important documents are translated and sent home. In the front lobby, all notifications are accessible and prominently displayed. Multilingual signage around the school notifies parents of the availability of language services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The Parent Survey, which is translated into a variety of languages, allows the school to gather feedback from parents. Parents are also asked their preferred language of communication. Also, the use of IO Classroom (formerly Skedula) allows for more frequent feedback from and communication with parents in a forum that provides translation. As a result of parental feedback, we have offered some workshops in parents' home languages and preferred languages to assist with use of our online grade book and communication system. 3 
