 13K492 School Name: ACADEMY OF ARTS AND LETTERS Principal: JOHN OREILLY   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)  Section 1: School Information Page School Information Academy of Arts & Letters 13K492 School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Phone Number: 331300011492 K-8 225 Adelphi Street 718 222-1605 School Number (DBN): 718 852-6020 Fax: John O’Reilly joreill@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: John O’Reilly John Allgood Ayanna Behin, Carla Licavoli Ayanna Behin Not Title 1 school Not high school None District Information Geographical District: 13 Superintendent’s Office Address: Zina Cooper- Williams Superintendent: 355 Park Place Brooklyn, NY 11238 zcooper@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 636-3284 Phone Number: 718 636-3266 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Brooklyn North Bernadette Fitzgerald FSC: Executive Director:   131 Livingston Street Brooklyn, NY 11201 Room 501 Executive Director’s Office Address: Bfitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718 225-5119 Phone Number: 718 935-4314 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. John O’Reilly John Allgood Ennis Addison Meghan Casey Sasha Swift Pia Micoli Lisa Misol Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) UFT UFT CSA Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Monifah Roberts Angelique Pannell Ayanna Behin Parent Parent Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Arts & Letters is a small, child-centered public school in Brooklyn encompassing Kindergarten through 8th grade. With only two classes at each grade level, we provide our children with a caring and intimate learning environment. At Arts & Letters we believe that the purpose of public education is to work in partnership with parents and communities to raise young people who are strong and flexible thinkers, connected to their individual culture and heritage and caring, responsible stewards and leaders of a vibrant, democratic society.   In the spirit of this purpose, we at Arts & Letters promise to cultivate joy, rigor, and meaning in each child's education; an education built on a belief that through a rich and challenging questioning of the world and ourselves, we can and will develop creative, confident, and courageous people who will make our world more just, enriched, and compassionate. Mission Statement A school is an articulation of a community's hopes and dreams for its children. In order to cultivate our young people into the powerful citizens our community needs, we must create and maintain a culture of excellence. Therefore, in order: To develop strong and flexible thinkers, our classrooms will be places where students pursue essential questions, big ideas, and the world's history, traditions, and discoveries. Alongside their classmates and teachers, they will explore great literature, big and small mathematical challenges, the disciplines and creative purposes of the arts, and exciting scientific ideas. Classrooms will be rich with purpose; the quality of the work built on feedback and revision. They will learn to read and read to learn, become curious and confident about problems, make specific observations, make sense of data and confidently handle numbers and calculations. They will develop a keen and critical eye to interpret what they see through multiple lenses. To help raise young people who are connected to their individual culture and heritage our school will continually develop curricula and create an environment that nurtures a sense of belonging in each child and family. We will provide opportunities for young people to learn about themselves and where they come from. Our classrooms and hallways will be filled with images, ideas, art and thinking from people who look like them and with whom they are connected. To develop the caring, responsible stewards and leaders that our community needs to nurture a vibrant democracy, our young people will have experiences that will allow them to learn from older and younger people, from those of other cultures and neighborhoods, and to spend time hearing one another out. Each project they complete individually and together will take time, require multiple drafts, feedback, and revision. Each piece of work will be celebrated and shared with others in our community. In our school, students will be asked to persevere in the face of difficulty, to celebrate success, and to learn from failure. They will be asked to listen carefully, to take a stand, to defend a new idea, and to take risks. To make our world just, enriched and compassionate, our young people must develop their compassion "muscles," requiring the practices of respect for others, focused and quiet reflection, the search for understanding, and a commitment to responsibility for one's self and for others. In our classrooms, our students will undertake projects that connect our school with our community, and with our past. To create a community of adults – both teachers and family members – that helps develop such powerful young people, the adults must be willing to work together and share their practices with one another. Just as students need multiple experiences with success, failure, and revision, so too do the adults in our community. Schools and communities teach values intentionally and unintentionally; our adults must not only strive to model our values, but also the reflective ability to learn from challenges when they fall short. Throughout our nine years with each child and family, Arts & Letters is committed to cultivating young people who will fulfill these hopes. 0  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Commitment to Diversity and Inclusion Arts & Letters strives to create a welcoming community of multi-talented, diverse individuals in which all members know that they are valued and appreciated for their unique experiences. We recognize and embrace the valuable offering of each person’s race, cultural tradition, religion, gender, nationality, socio-economic position, age, sexual orientation, and physical ability. We believe that by making each student’s learning visible we are better able to truly see each student and her unique gifts. Our school is committed to nurturing in each of us a better appreciation of our own distinctive voice, of our common humanity and of a sense of ownership in the school community. We believe that participation in an inclusive school culture supports self-esteem and plants the seeds for positive contributions to the world. We are committed to:  Teaching our students the skills and sensibilities necessary to live in a richly diverse and increasingly global world. To that end, our curriculum explores culture in a spirit of admiration for its infinite variety while supporting a multi-sensory approach to learning and teaching.  The constant vigilance, revision and patience required in creating and maintaining a welcoming community. We will need training, renewal and a willingness to change normed practices as well as an openness to creating new traditions.  Ensuring that our community has a significant level of racial and economic diversity in the student body, the faculty, and the administration.  Having at least one inclusion class at every grade level with a significant number of students with special strengths and needs.  Providing the resources and support to achieve these goals. Our commitment to create a diverse and inclusive community is a vital expression of the vision of Arts & Letters. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Arts & Letters is a vibrantly diverse school. We are committed to building a strong and inclusive community. We want to combat the profound school segregation evident throughout the New York school system. We bring a lens of racial equity to our work and are continuously seeking ways be a more culturally responsive place that build ups all kinds of kids and families. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. We continually make progress building trust with our community. Student led conferences, public and internal accountability systems like our Roundtables and benchmark assessments are helping to make the learning happening here at Arts & Letters more visible to our parent body. At Arts & Letters this year we will be focused on making our teaching and learning more rigorous. 1  2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 13K492 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 519 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 1 1 5 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 7 6 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 30.0% % Attendance Rate 27.0% % Reduced Lunch 0.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.6% 16.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 37.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.25 0% 15% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 73.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 92% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO NO NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO NO NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 85 85 96.4% 2.5% 21.0% 31.8% 6.9% 7.7% 4 24% 3.7 63.4% 85% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In reviewing data from the NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey and the Quality Review results we see a need to build greater curricular cohesiveness and improve our differentiation practices. This is vital work for Arts & Letters to engage in to make sure that all of our students are making progress. Each year we have consistently dedicated our Spring PD/Inquiry Cycle to Unit planning. Administration and vertical team leaders have an ever changing document capturing our shared expectations around unit planning at Arts and Letters Kindergarten through 8th grade. Expeditionary Learning/Outward Bound Design Principles, Coalition of Essential Schools Common Principles, and Understanding by Design by Wiggins & McTighe influenced our thinking. The unit planning components we decided upon included: having a relevant and rich topic, culminating exhibitions of learning, topical and debatable essential questions framing the thinking/learning of the unit, learning targets which we developed using the Next Generation Learning Standards, habits of mind to deepen critical thinking, feedback routines and revisions, differentiation, ongoing assessment, explicit thinking routines modeled and utilized. We provided research and examples from each of the components and all teachers wrote/revised at least one unit plan to align with our shared expectations. At the end of the cycle, teachers participated in a gallery walk giving and receiving feedback on components of their choice. Any time a new unit is created or revised, teachers revisit our shared expectations and document and research to ensure that their units are NGLS aligned, and designed to maximize deeper thinking. What follows are the key components that focus our planning for thinking rich and meaningful units of study. Key Components of Units of Study Exhibitions of Learning When creating or revising a unit plan, teacher teams typically begin designing a rich culminating project that allows a student to demonstrate the understanding and skills that they have developed over the course of the unit. This end product brings a overarching purpose and meaning to the classroom’s learning from kindergarten to 8th grade, borrowing from the idea of an “expedition” within the Expeditionary Learning curricular model. Fourth graders know that their research on the Iroquois is not just to broaden their understanding of another culture, but to accurately conduct an Iroquois council meeting that they have collaboratively written the script and choreographed the 4  actions/roles of each participant. In first grade, students share their understanding of states of matter through an iron chef cook-off, where they articulate the changing matter in their cooking demonstrations alongside their written how-to recipes for a class cookbook. 8th grade humanities students engage in an individual year-long social justice research project that culminates in a ten to twenty page research paper with an annotated bibliography. These exhibitions are intentionally designed to make the student’s learning public within the school community, through a variety of school-wide structures. Teachers design projects that gain meaning and relevance when shared in these A&L traditions. In grades 3-8, culminating projects become the centerpiece of discussion in our twice annual Roundtables. Students review their portfolio of work in each subject, and select exhibitions that best demonstrate their learning (and their learning process) to share with a small group of peers, educators and family members. Teachers plan strategically for these Roundtables, so that students have various exhibitions to choose to present and to ensure that the projects represent the students’ deep understanding of a topic that matters to them. In K-2, teachers craft exhibitions of learning that can be made public at end-of-unit shares, where families and colleagues participate in students’ presentation of their learning. In this year’s Kindergarten tree museum, students acted as curators and showed their families (and then other families) around to exhibits where they had constructed an interactive tree model (complete with 3D roots/root hairs), created watercolor tree pieces, and built wooden model trees on a field trip to Construction Kids. Learning Targets Since the first drafts of our unit plans and maps, our curriculum planning has always integrated the Next Generation Learning Standards with content drawn from the NYC DOE scope and sequences. In preparation for our launch of K-8 Student-Led Conferences last year, teams worked together to transform the NGLS into learning targets in language that was accessible to students and families. This helped even our youngest students take ownership over the mastery of those learning targets, and develop the language skills to speak comfortably about their progress towards this mastery. In these SLCs, students from K-8 were expected to articulate to their families and teachers areas of strength and weakness within the targets, and actionable steps they would take to achieve mastery in areas needing improvement. Habits of Mind In the spring of 2014, when our vertical team leaders were developing the framework for all unit plans at Arts & Letters, they included habits of mind on the document so that teachers would be intentional in their planning for higher order thinking in each unit of study. Through our inquiry around curriculum planning, a specific focus on the habits of “Thinking Flexibly”, “Persisting” and “Questioning” has provided opportunities for critical thinking across many different units. Thinking flexibly begins in kindergarten, when we ensure that children spend part of their in open-ended situations, such as Block building, where problem-solving and negotiation are embedded. We have developed a Kindergarten problem-solving curriculum for children to learn to navigate disagreements through which their language develops authentically. In all our lower grades math classrooms, teachers offer problems that don’t have one particular solution; children share out and are exposed to a variety of solutions. Further illustrating how teachers plan for “persisting”, in our middle grades math classrooms, students grapple with non-routine problems, which we call Scholar’s Challenges, and learn to persevere and think flexibly in order to solve complex problems. Our 7th grade humanities team invites students to develop the habit of “questioning” through their participation in Socratic Seminars, where they discuss the primary and secondary source documents with classmates in a structure that invites a thorough interrogation of early American history. Feedback A vital element to a student’s process of creating a high quality exhibition/project is the feedback he/she receives on it. Teachers consider this aspect of a unit and implement opportunities- called feedback routines- for students to analyze and critique their peers’ work in the classroom. Starting in 3rd grade, feedback routines typically consist of a student’s work being displayed with the document camera for the class so that, after the student briefly presents the piece of work, peers can offer “kind, specific and helpful” feedback. The student then has the “last word” to respond 5  to the class with which feedback they would work to implement. Visual arts classrooms have implemented these feedback routines to build the level of discourse around an individual student’s art piece. In middle grade math classrooms, Students work hard to explain their process and thinking orally and in writing for these problems, and compare the efficiency and elegance of their strategies with those of other mathematicians. Alignment to the Next Generation Learning Standards Since our expansion to being a K-8 school started eight years ago we have been continually trying to build cohesiveness of practice and planning across the grades. We have lots of areas of commonality but there are also aspects of our K-4 and 5 -8 programs that are distinct and need to be so. What follows are some specific ways that we have addressed our alignment to Next Generation Learning Standards to the differing developmental needs of a school with 4 year olds as well as 14 year olds. Alignment to the Next Generation Learning Standards in the Lower Grades Our teacher teams have continuously built and designed our curricula around the focus of these standards from the beginning. Every grade completes 3-4 units of study a year, each of which is a thorough investigation of a topic that combines content standards with literacy and math skills. These units are organized around essential questions, NGLS aligned major learning targets and culminating exhibitions of learning. For example, in the second grade forces and motion unit, we ask children “what makes things move?”.When building new curriculum, teams meet over the summer to find meaningful connections between the NGLS and the big ideas we want to explore with our students. As they create a new unit, they integrate these standards into a unit that will investigate a rich question for 2+ months as they build towards a rich final exhibition of learning that they will share with their community of teachers and families. In addition, teacher teams meet weekly throughout the year to refine these unit plans, but also to consider the yearlong curriculum map and make sure that the NGLS are addressed logically and thematically through the year. Focus on content-rich nonfiction reading A primary example of this in grades K-4 is our school’s emphasis on content-rich non-fiction reading, to allow students to build knowledge about the world around them by accessing a wide range of informational texts. Our K-3 curricula follows an interdisciplinary structure, where students apply the nonfiction reading and writing skills they are building to learn about rich science and/or social studies content. For example, when our Kindergarteners are digging deeply into their Bridge Study, they are reading books about bridges, discussion the mechanics of bridges in a read aloud discussion and observing the components of bridges in a visit to the Brooklyn Bridge. Likewise, our third graders apply literacy lessons around non-fiction text elements and note taking strategies to research a specific bird’s adaptations in our Bird Study, so that they can later write a non-fiction bird article. In both cases, students are gathering a deep understanding of this science content alongside their developing literacy skills. This structure ensures that our students are spending nearly 60 percent of their in-class reading time on non-fiction reading, and our literacy instruction is geared towards strategies that will equip students to comprehend these texts, with a focus on navigating text features, building academic vocabulary in content areas, and organizing key information in their research. Math This year our math classrooms K to 8 are using Investigations (Turk). We shifted from Math in Focus when we began to recognize a greater need for opportunities to build conceptual understanding alongside procedural skills and fluency, as is a major shift in the Next Generation Learning Standards. Math in Focus did not provide the type of open-ended investigations that would build conceptual understanding of key concepts through a discourse around multiple 6  solutions to the same problem. So after researching various math resources and choosing Investigations, we decided to begin a partnership with Metamorphosis to help us facilitate more math talk and problem solving. We’ve sent over half our K-6 staff to two or three day PD institutes with them, and purchased the Context for Learning (problem solving investigations) materials and resources to support these teachers to implement these investigations. Alignment to the Next Generation Learning Standards in the Middle Grades The alignment of our curriculum to the Next Generation Learning Standards has been ongoing for the middle grades. During the Summer Institute last year, teachers examined the new standards and started to revise their curriculum to reflect the standards. Teachers continue to revise curriculum and remain cognizant of their alignment to the NGLS and scope and sequences to determine the content and skills covered in all units. Increasing text volume and complexity across disciplines: In Humanities grades 5-8, students participate in the 50 Book Challenge, a reading goal of completing 50 texts from a variety of genres during a single school year. In Grades 3-8, students independently read texts at their own level at least 3 times a week for 30 minutes. Students are supported to grow as readers through conferring and guided reading/strategy groups. In addition to reading at their “own” levels, students tackle rigorous, grade level text (as determined by Lexile, DRP, F&P levels) during whole class reads and book clubs. Students learn comprehension strategies and engage in close reading of text passages multiple times for different purposes. Quantity and rigor of texts selected as improved in the past 2 years. In Seventh grade, students now read The Absolutely True Diary of a Part Time Indian, Copper Sun, and Animal Farm. In Eighth grade students read four shared texts (including The Fire Next Time and Of Mice and Men) and 4 book club texts (including Nickel and Dimed and The Grapes of Wrath). Many of these texts students will read again in high school or even college. Emphasizing non-fiction text as a means to access knowledge: Most often students are learning about new content through reading nonfiction text. In Fourth grade humanities, students read, discuss, and take notes from trade books about the Iroquois to prepare for the re-enactment of a Native American council meeting. Seventh graders analyze primary source documents, dissect various textbook chapters, and essays to be able to answer the question during a Socratic Seminar and argumentative essay. In addition to learning new content through hands on experimentation, students are reading nonfiction text to build background knowledge about the scientific topics they are studying. With the addition of reading in science, students are asking deeper questions and demonstrating more critical thinking in their lab write-ups. And as a result of this shift, the science teachers have now added a new section to students’ labs, providing space for students to include factual knowledge they’ve acquired through their research and reading. Math Every 4th -8th mathematics classroom is a blend of problem-solving and building computational fluency, as promoted by the mathematical practices of the common core. Students grapple with non-routine problems, which we call Scholar’s Challenges, and learn to persevere and think flexibly in order to solve complex problems. Students work hard to explain their process and thinking orally and in writing for these problems, and compare the efficiency and elegance of their strategies with those of other mathematicians. Being able to communicate their reasoning is a general part of every class, from presenting their warm-up problems on the document camera, to turn-and-talks related to a challenging question given to move a lesson forward. Curricula Alignment Across the Grades 7  Vertical team curricular alignment: Over the past 3 years, each vertical team has conducted a curricular review designed to align curricula within our school as well as with the Next Generation Learning Standards. Utilizing the NGLS and Arts and Letters Unit Maps, teachers identified areas of curricular redundancy and/or standards that needed additional focus. Examples of curricular shifts as a result of this work include: Humanities  Each grade (3-8) now has at least 1 unit/year culminating in a research project.  The focus on “counterclaims” in writing now begins in 7th grade.  Independent text based conversations begin in 4th grade with Reciprocal Teaching and evolve into Socratic Seminar and whole class discussions in 7-8th grades. Science  The science team is using the current inquiry cycle to check that all content standards are actually being taught in a logical sequence from 3rd to 8th grade -- that none are being skipped, or double-taught. We shifted some standards around in order to create more coherent progressions of study (for example, moving weather to 6th grade in order to build a stronger background knowledge to support their culminating unit at the end of the year on climate change).  Our next step as a department is to articulate specific goals and skills for each grade for each step of the scientific inquiry process. As an example, for hypothesizing, when do students stop making simple predictions and start using scientific research to ground their hypotheses in the work of the discipline? Or, for collecting data, what measuring tools, units of measure, and levels of precision are appropriate at each grade level? Math  Across the grades, the math team utilizes similar structures and scaffolds for teaching problem solving. For the current inquiry cycle, the team is using the Japanese style lesson study to hone structures and solidify them. In grades 3 through 8 all students persist and explain their process of thinking. As a team, the math department has aligned the rubric for these problems. In grades 3-5, they are developing investigations that help students build strategies to solve problems and have rich discussions about big mathematical concepts.    As a team, we are always in the process of building a 3-8 math curricular progression where concepts cohesively spiral in complexity and align with the Next Generation Learning Standards. Arts  Creation of a K-8 Arts Framework that incorporates the studio habits of mind, benchmark art skills and the  use of artist statements to encourage students to reflect on their use of these creative habits Incorporating feedback (kind, specific and helpful) and thinking routines (see/think/wonder) that are aligned with grade teams and content area classes 8  Use of Data in Unit and Assessment Planning One way that we have developed our use of student data in refining curricula is through our analysis of benchmark data in teacher teams. This year’s winter inquiry cycle is focused around building and strengthening a content-specific shared practice, as a response to students’ fall benchmark data. In grades K-2, teachers self-selected into groups that would focus on reading, writing or math so that each subject area’s data would be addressed within the inquiry. In vertical teams, teachers examined the fall benchmark data using a “see, think, wonder” thinking routine as a protocol. They recorded patterns and noticings within each class, across standards/learning targets within the grade/subject, across grades in a skill or across subsets within a grade/subject. Each team then narrowed their focus to one pattern or observation that aroused the most curiosity, and then discussed how shared practices in that content/subject might relate to the observed trend. Teams then selected a shared practice that they were interested in developing through a form of Japanese Lesson Study, while tracking its effect on student achievement on the second round of benchmarks. This data inquiry cycle will inform the third cycle of inquiry around curriculum planning, as teachers will respond to their observations in data sets and from the lesson study, as they continue to refine their curricula to better engage all students in academic tasks. In addition to this connection between benchmark data and this PD cycle, there are other common practices to plan and refine curriculum based on student work and data. During various K-3 grade team common planning meetings throughout the year, teachers will norm and grade final writing pieces for a unit together and input the scores into a shared spreadsheet. In the following meeting, teachers will use the data to reflect on the unit and make changes to the curriculum map to address areas of need. Sometimes, these conversations resulted in a major shift to the end writing project to better align with the NGLS, such as our second grade informational writing piece that we adjusted from a multi-paragraph piece to a more detailed single paragraph on a type of community they had researched. Teacher teams complete a similar process for math assessments, but with a focus on re-teaching skills and content based on student performance on end of unit assessments. In early childhood grades, teachers conduct math interviews to assess students’ skills and understanding, and analyze these recording sheets to plan for re-teaching in small groups and one on one conferences. They also adjust the pacing of our Investigations curriculum to address areas of need for the next year. Differentiation In addition to using data to plan inquiry and professional development, our recent look at K-8 student benchmark data has led to planning for increased differentiation in the classroom. When teacher teams observed a pattern of achievement for a particular group of students, they planned to use small group instruction in the next unit of study to provide extra support for students. For example, the 2nd grade team noticed a pronounced need for ICT students to need more support developing ideas in their writing. In the following unit, the teachers in that classroom planned to use more parallel teaching and small group pull-out instruction when students were working to brainstorm and develop ideas for their writing project. In the third grade, teachers noticed that some students that had very high scores with math content were still lagging in their scores around written explanation of mathematical thinking. The teacher planned to use flexible grouping to provide support for these learners, as well as any other pattern of need 9  within the class. In the middle grades, DRP and F&P reading scores have guided the afterschool reading intervention plan, in providing for the specific needs of students reading below grade level. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By the end of this school year, 90% of teachers will show measurable progress in Danielson’s Domain 1, specifically component 1f- Designing Student Assessments and in Domain 3, component 3D- using assessment in instruction. We expect a 5% growth in MOTP ratings for these two components. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional Dialogue- Every teacher will take part in a series of professional dialogues with administration throughout the year. Teachers will provide benchmark assessments and unit plans prior to the conversation, and the conversation will center on alignment with key Common Core standards and authenticity to the unit of study. The dialogue will also focus on the ways that teachers develop and maintain classroom cultures that promote student ownership and voice. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers K-8 September 2018 - June 2019 Year long Administration and teachers Professional development around the strategic use of data and benchmark assessments to more readily respond to students’ learning needs. All teachers K-8. Fall 2018 Professional development about and use of reading intervention strategies routines with struggling readers. This work will support small group reading interventions and will provide much needed support to our low level readers. Special Education team Year long Administration and vertical teacher teams Administration and special education vertical team Post our homemade Common Core aligned 2016-2017 benchmark assessments and rubrics on our website so that parents will be able to better support their children at home. We think that this will also greatly help our community understand better what the Common Core standards are. All teachers K-8 Fall 2018 Administration and teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Arts & Letters has a number of rituals and routines that run throughout the year which help us make visible the learning going on here at the school, build trust with our families and convey our expectations for rigorous thinking and learning. All staff are responsible for helping to make these events possible with the Administration running point. here are  Internal benchmark assessment system. We have created and adapted Common Core aligned benchmark assessments for all of our students K-8. We administer them three times a year (October, February and May/June). The benchmark assessments provide data for student performance in each grade and are used by 1  teachers to make instructional and promotional decisions. The information gleaned from benchmark assessments is central to the goals talked about during the Student-Led Conferences.  Student-Led Conferences (SLCs). SLCs occur two times a year in grades K – 8 (November and March). This is when teacher/advisor, parent and student all sit down to talk about academic and behavioral growth. Students prepare for the conversation by writing goals (Glows and Grows) and reflecting on their benchmark assessments. Through SLCs, students are held accountable for their own learning and thinking and take ownership of their own accomplishments and struggles.  Roundtables presentations. These celebration/defense of learning events occur twice a year for our 3rd - 8th graders (January and June). Roundtables is a time for students to come together with parents, students, staff, and community members to present important thinking and learning from the past semester. Students often showcase exhibitions, projects, lab reports and scholar’s challenges. Every student’s portfolio of learning is looked at by his or her peers, parents, and teachers. Students are then questioned by the table about their thinking, helping them to develop their academic voices. Shares of learning for grades K – 2 (On going throughout the year- around five per classroom). Shares are held at the end of each unit of study. Parents are invited into the room, they are given time to walk around, look at student work and then the students present their learning. At the end of the presentation, there is a time for questions, answers and feedback to further students thinking.   Art Expos (February and June). At when we celebrate the differing arts classes that we have at Arts & Letters. The Arts Expo has a gallery-style exhibition of visual art from all ages, and a music and dramatic performance component in our auditorium. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will use some of our Fair Student Funding to pay teachers to come back at the beginning of September for three days of professional development around the use of benchmark assessments and planning for student centered learning environments. Our PTA will also support our teachers to go to professional learning opportunities outside of the school throughout the year. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. Data from the benchmarks completed in October, February and May will show the areas of student strength, growth and areas for improvement. The written goals completed in class and advisory will show individualized attention to the areas where each student is “glowing” and also needs to keep growing. 2. Degree of Reading Power data for 5th to 8th grade students will be used in February to measure our progress in our ongoing work to create curricular cohesiveness and effective differentiation for the needs of each child. 3. Monday professional learning meetings in September and October will focus on Danielson's component 3d. We will be diving into the data generated from last year’s spring benchmark assessments and looking to the October and November benchmark assessment window. In the spring we will use Monday professional development meetings for 2  unit and lesson planning and will focus on Danielson’s component 1e. We want to see a 10% increase in MOTP ratings for these components by the end of the year. 4. In the Professional Dialogues teachers and administrators will have one-to-one goal setting conferences and look at benchmarks assessments and discuss data use in the classroom. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) DRP data and Benchmark assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Six years ago Arts & Letters began to work with a staff developer from Harvard’s Project Zero around developing and maintaining a vibrant culture of thinking here at our school. With the core belief that learning requires thinking, we have been looking for and adopting more and more ways to bring urgency to, and account for, the thinking that happens in our classrooms, hallways, and professional learning time. Vital to the creation and maintenance of these high expectations for thinking have been practices that we have adopted and adapted to better attend to a number of the cultural forces that Ron Ritchhart describes in his book Creating cultures of thinking. In particular we have been working on the following cultural forces: time, opportunities, interactions and relationships, and expectations. Below are descriptions of what these cultural forces mean in a thinking-rich school and what we at Arts & Letters are doing to bring greater urgency about thinking and high expectations for learning to students and staff. There are practices and routines mentioned here that will be repetitive to other sections. This is intentional: culture and instruction are interdependent. Time Time is always tight in schools. Arts & Letters is no different in this regard; there is never enough time to do all that needs to be done. Being very intentional about how time is used in classrooms, professional learning opportunities, and parent communication/ meetings so as to promote more thinking time is very important to the creation of a rich culture of thinking. A school like Arts & Letters that values thinking provides time for its constituents to explore topics in depth, time to plan together, and time to come up with thoughtful actions and responses. In classrooms at Arts & Letters you often see:  Teachers using timers to track independent reading, writing, and problem-solving time.  Teachers carefully planning lessons to maximize thinking time by using thinking routines and questions which invite/force contemplation in their classrooms.  Teachers conferring with students and giving them frequent opportunities to reflect on their work and revise  it. Students using group protocols like MicroLab in which each person is given time to address the question of issue without interruption. Between each group member’s talk time is a thirty-second silent think time. 4  Students using workshop time to write, reflect, re-read, and revise. Arts & Letters’ professional learning time/program has:  Teachers and administrators taking on the role of timekeeper for protocols and group meetings.  Teachers and administrators modeling the timing of thinking routines and discussion protocols.  A carefully constructed program that prioritizes common planning time with whole grade teams (1 period a week), planning partners (3 periods a week) and a number of vertical team members (1 period a week).  Adopted a School Based Option which allows us to make changes to our yearly schedule, providing two additional planning days for all teachers throughout the year.  Utilized our PROSE school status to modify our daily schedule, allowing a number of teachers to have different start and end times which enables them to do reading and math intervention with small groups of students.  Hired substitute teachers when necessary to allow vertical teams to meet and plan together. Opportunities Providing opportunities that invite/require students, teachers, and parents to engage in and talk about thinking leads to the development of deeper understanding. It is critical for a school to provide these opportunities all of its constituents in order to establish and maintain high learning expectations. We at Arts & Letters are continually trying to differentiate the opportunities that we offer to our community so that we can best meet its needs. In the classroom, they spring mostly from structures and routines that require all students to engage in the content of the classes. With our faculty we try to provide as many choices for professional learning as we can; our teachers are at different stages of development and do not have the same needs. With parents we are always looking for more ways to make the learning that happens at school visible to them. Opportunities to communicate with parents about their child’s learning are essential to the partnership between parents and Arts & Letters staff. In Arts & Letters classrooms you often see:  Teachers using ‘Thinking Routines’ from Harvard’s Project Zero (Kindergarten through 8th grade). There are six thinking routines that are used by many of our teachers at different points in a given lesson. Each is connected a specific thinking move (like the exploration of an idea, or the synthesizing of a thought, or for digging deeper into a topic). The six core routines at Arts & Letters are: Think/Pair/Share, See/Think/Wonder, Connect/Extend/Challenge, Written Conversations, Claim/Evidence/Support, MicroLab and Thinking Roles.  Teachers facilitating students who are in centers/stations as a means to differentiate instruction and promote independence (Kindergarten through 8th grade). In an attempt to provide supports and extensions to students at different levels of understanding, all our teachers have developed ways to support our learners by breaking them in small groups (determined by either skill needs, choice, or teaching goal).  Arts teachers facilitating critique sessions in 2nd through 8th grade art classes. Ron Berger’s The Ethics of Excellence has been very influential on our arts teachers. His description of feedback sessions that require each student to present to an audience of peers and teachers and receive kind, helpful, and specific commentary for the work, has been adapted into a critique routine used in our studio art and drama classes. 5    Students reading independently a book of their choosing (5th through 8th grades). All students engage in a significant amount of independent reading in our school (for at least 30 minutes each day and 30-45 minutes at home). They are encouraged to choose books at their “just right” level, although we have assessments to help us understand their independent and their instructional levels. Our independent reading is prioritized through the 2 Million Words campaign, which aims to increase fluency. Also, in our humanities classrooms, teachers conference individually with students. These conferences provide smaller goals and teaching points for teachers. Conference notes are taken, and new goals are determined together with students and documented by teachers. Students participating in the Daily Five in 1st through 4th grades. After a mini lesson our 1st through 4th grade students are given opportunities each day to work on their comprehension skills, accuracy, fluency, and expanding their vocabulary (C.A.F.É. -- adapted from the work of Gail Boushey and Joan Moser and described in The Café Book). Each student chooses either to read to his/herself, read to a buddy, work on words, work with three or four other students in a reader’s theatre group, or join a book club. During this time teachers conference with students and set and revise goals. Students using their science journals/notebooks to document their thinking during scientific inquiries. In all nine grade levels, our teachers strive to help students find their own scientific questions, and to provide as many opportunities as possible to delve into those questions. All grades require the documentation of observations where students use their senses, drawings that are labeled, and written hypotheses. For the middle school the science notebooks contain hypotheses, procedures, observations, and conclusions to experiments they have done in class. The notebooks also have researchable questions that they either have explored or want to explore. Opportunities for professional learning at Arts & Letters often involve:  Teachers conducting action research or inquiry. Every year at Arts & Letters there are three cycles of inquiry. For the past two years the cycles have kept to the same three topics -- teacher moves that promote more thinking and learning, using data with students, and unit planning and revision.  Attendance at the late August Summer Institute at Arts and Letters which is used as the professional learning building blocks for the rest of the school year, giving teachers structured time to work in teacher teams, internalize the initiatives for the year and receive general information about operations.  Engaging in professional dialogues and meeting with one administrator to set instructional and professional goals for the year based on the Danielson Framework. Staff members prepare for the meeting by filling out the pre-work worksheet and then an administrator and the conferring staff member co-write goals.  Ensuring that all staff are offered a menu of professional development opportunities throughout the year. Additionally, staff members are invited to sit down with administration and other faculty members several times throughout the year to discuss pre-assigned books or articles that help develop teaching practice and skills.  Teachers going to national educational conferences like NCTM, NCTE or NAEYC.  Teachers participating in the Learning Partners Plus program. Arts & Letters is part of a group of four schools (MS 839, BASES, New American Academy ) that are all looking at the ways that our schools can create greater racial equity within our intentionally integrated schools. We have 11 teachers who are participating in an inquiry cycle with other teachers from these schools.  Teachers using a planning day to visit another school to learn about a promising practice or to revise a benchmark or unit plan.  Teachers going to a math teaching institute run by Metamorphosis. 6  Interactions and relationships Another key component of a school culture that has high expectations for thinking and learning is found in the daily interactions and relationships that school community members have with one another. Everyone needs to be seen and heard to create the feeling of safety vital to nurture curious and powerful people. To build and protect a respect for, and interest in, everyone's thoughts and ideas we use many rituals and protocols to structure conversations and inquiry. We also design our program and school around knowing children well and making sure that each child and that child’s family has someone on staff who will be their advocate. Knowing young people and their families well requires time and space during the school day and school year for their social and emotional needs to be addressed and attended to. In Arts & Letters classrooms you may see:  Teacher practice that follows Responsive Classrooms suggestions. Our Kindergarten to 4th grade teachers go to the week-long summertime Responsive Classroom workshops. Our classes have routines like morning meeting and closing circles where students share thoughts, worries, and joys with each other. When conflicts emerge, adult-facilitated mediation happens between the students and is often discussed by with the whole class. There are always greetings and goodbyes where students’ names are said aloud and they are looked at. Being seen and heard are essential to these routines and they have greatly influenced how we have set up our academic time so that each child’s work is public and receives feedback either within a teacher conference, in a small group or whole class share. Conferencing with students is a routine that involves the creation of both academic and social-emotional goals.  5th to 8th grade teachers running an advisory circle. Advisory meets twice a week and we have a similar structure that the elementary morning meeting has, in that students create a circle and greet each other saying each other’s names and looking at one another. There is a share and an activity. The school’s self-produced Advisory Guide has lots of activities to do with advisories and we continue to add more units tailored to the developmental needs of individual grades. As with the Kindergarten to 4th grade conferencing routine, advisors sit and conference with students and make and revise academic and social-emotional goals.  Teachers use protocols like Socratic Seminar, Fish Bowls, Jigsaws, Gallery Walks, TAG feedback sheets (Tell something you notice, Ask a question, Give a suggestion), group problem-solving during closing circle to create safe and highly structured ways to discuss content and problems.  4th through 8th grade humanities teachers using reciprocal teaching when reading historical fiction or non-fiction texts. Students will pair off and read an unseen text together. One student reads a paragraph, while the other listens and then retells. They switch back and forth, stopping to record questions, unknown or interesting words, connections, and summaries. This allows the students to more independently gather the meaning from a text. The class also comes together to discuss questions and confusion, so that reading is both an individual and group experience.  A document camera being used to show student work to an entire class for feedback and discussion. The feedback routines that we have developed using this technology have been invaluable for kids to give and receive warm, specific, and helpful feedback on their writing and problem solving. The feedback routines that use the document camera have allowed students to really get a better understanding of what high quality work looks like. Interactions and relationships connected to professional learning at Arts & Letters often involve: 7  Faculty meetings that are filled with protocols and thinking routines that are also used with young people. These structures support a respectful and thinking-rich environment.  Professional learning days that bring together people who normally do not work with one another in a team. Our Teacher Roundtables require trios of teachers, each from different grade and vertical teams, to work together.  The occasional use of a Restorative Circle to check in with one another and get to know each other better.  Monthly study group meetings (Whine and Cheese) in the principal’s office.  A 50-minute professional dialogue between an administrator and a teacher that is centered on improving practice and fostering innovative initiatives in classrooms. Expectations Lastly, a school culture that values thinking must have routinized ways in which the learning that comes from it is celebrated and/or looked at closely. Schools are often very focused on compliance and completion of tasks and work. Often the thinking and learning that we want gets lost when students and teachers are too fixated on getting the tasks of curriculum done. We need to keep high learning expectations for students at the forefront of our hearts and minds, not expectations of students. At Arts & Letters we have a number of systems and rituals that allow us to better see and hear about what students and teachers are learning, and also add celebratory urgency to the thinking that we expect of them. The routines also help us to minimize the numbing and isolating creep of compliance and completion. Routines, structures and systems found in Arts & Letters classrooms which convey our expectations for thinking and learning can be seen:  In our internal benchmark assessment system. We have created and adapted Next Generation Learning Standards aligned benchmark assessments for all of our students K-8. We administer them three times a year. The benchmark assessments provide data for student performance in each grade and are used by teachers to make instructional and promotional decisions. The information gleaned from benchmark assessments is also central to the goals talked about during the Student-Led Conferences.  During Student-Led Conferences (SLCs) which occur two times a year in grades K – 8. This is when teacher/advisor, parent and student all sit down to talk about academic and behavioral growth. Students prepare for the conversation by writing goals (Glows and Grows) and reflecting on their benchmark assessments. Through SLCs, students are held accountable for their own learning and thinking and take ownership of their own accomplishments and struggles.  During our Roundtables presentations which occur twice a year for our 3rd - 8th graders. Roundtables is a time for students to come together with parents, students, staff, and community members to present important thinking and learning from the past semester. Students often showcase exhibitions, projects, lab reports and scholar’s challenges. Every student’s portfolio of learning is looked at by his or her peers, parents, and teachers. Students are then questioned by the table about their thinking, helping them to develop their academic voices. Shares of learning for grades K – 2. Shares are held at the end of each unit of study. Parents are invited into the room, they are given time to walk around, look at student work and then the students present their  8 learning. At the end of the presentation, there is a time for questions, answers and feedback to further students thinking.  During Scholar’s Challenge times in 4th through 8th grade math classes. Several times a semester, students are given a leveled open-ended math problem. They are given explicit instructions and time to “struggle” with a problem that is meant to challenge them. This, we believe, is essential for students who are not used to dealing with confusion. After the struggle time, they are given an opportunity to share with peers. Then they have to document their thinking. This assignment is a core practice because it shows our commitment to thinking strategies and the development of persistence when confused. To develop strong and flexible thinkers we need to provide our young people with multiple experiences where they are driven outside their comfort zone.  At our twice-a-year Arts Expo when we celebrate the differing arts classes that we have at Arts & Letters. The Arts Expo has a gallery-style exhibition of visual art from all ages, and a music and dramatic performance component in our auditorium. Routines, structures and systems found in the professional learning time at Arts & Letters which convey our expectations for thinking and learning can be seen:  During the three teacher-led inquiry cycles that we do in a given year. For the past two years we have consistently focused our inquiry on teacher moves that promote engagement in the fall, learning from data in the winter, and tuning our units of study in the spring.  During professional dialogues that teachers have with administrators. The Professional Dialogue worksheet is also a great tool that we use to convey our expectations for each other around thinking, learning, and collaborating with one another.  During Teacher Roundtables on the two official DOE professional learning days during the year. Just as the students are expected to share their learning in a Roundtable setting, teachers demonstrate their learning from our professional inquiries. Depending on the teacher’s individual focusing question, each teacher shares a video of their practice, student work, or unit plans, and gets warm, specific and helpful feedback from colleagues. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 9  The percentage of Arts & Letters middle school students who agree and strongly agree to the Learning Environment Survey prompt “In how many of your classes are you challenged?” will increase five percentage point for the 2018-2019 school year. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Continue to work with our Learning Partners schools to observe, document and build on strong feedback practices found in classrooms. This will happen in the preparation for visits and during the school visits. With MSQI deepen our reading instruction of non-fiction texts particularly with our special education and science teachers. We also hope that we will learn from MSQI ways to implement stronger individual and small group conferences that allow us to better see, hear and understand the thinking and learning going on with our students. During the professional dialogue meetings between administrators and teachers will be a routine that tracks an estimated number of minutes in a typical classroom lesson in which students are invited to think. The lesson step that has the lowest percentage of thinking minutes will an area of focus throughout the year. Monday Professional Development time will be used in December, January and February to conduct inquiry around teacher moves that build greater engagement for all levels of learners. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? K-8 teachers Year long Administration and model teachers. 6-8 grade teachers and special needs students Year long Administration and middle grade MSQI liaison. K- 8 Faculty Year long Administration and faculty K-8 teachers Winter Administration and teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. At Arts & Letters we provide a lot of access to parents to visit classes and spend the day with us. We have a number of monthly events that invite parents in and allow parents time to talk with school personnel about their children and ways that the school can support learning. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1  We will use some of the funding connected with the Learning Partners and MSQI programs to pay for substitutes so that teachers can go visit other schools. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● The use of feedback routines that we continue to learn from our Learning Partners work by teachers and students will lead to gains in skill mastery as shown in benchmark assessment data, exhibitions of learning and culminating projects. ● From the beginning to the end of the year we expect to see at least five points of growth in our lowest percent of readers as shown from the DRP assessment. ● To estimate the level of student engagement we will use the thinking minute tracking routine during the professional dialogues. This is with the belief that the more minutes of thinking the greater the level of student engagement. ● We will be monitoring the number of behavioral referrals connected to bullying. We hope to see the continued downturn in the data as compared to last year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. DRP assessments ORRS report Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Teacher teams are the instructional and organizational/operational foundations of our school. Grade and vertical teams meet weekly. Additionally vertical team and grade team leaders meet with administrators to collaborate on the work of the school. Teams run independently of administrators (although we attend meetings) and there is remarkable collaboration and shared accountability among teachers due to the strength of the team structure and strong teacher leadership. Our teacher teams are central to our strong collegial culture and to all innovation that goes on in teacher practice. Instructional teacher teams (Vertical Teams) Our vertical teams meet weekly on Monday afternoons and engage in three 6-8 week rounds of inquiry/study per year. The themes of these cycles remain consistent year to year, yet the specific problems of practice are decided upon by the team’s needs and the goals of the school that particular year. The broad categories are as follows: fall- “instructional moves” teachers use to leverage increased thinking among students, winter- building and strengthening a content-specific shared practice, spring: refining unit plans to reflect Next Generation Learning Standards shifts/Arts and Letters shared vision for Unit Planning. Each cycle includes data analysis, intervisitation, sharing of findings, and feedback from colleagues.  This fall, vertical teams split up into pairs/triads to investigate an area of instruction from Ron Ritchhart’s 8 Cultural Forces. Theories of Action included: If feedback is limited to a smaller number of criteria/strategies, students will incorporate the feedback in their revisions at higher rates. “Before” and “after” data collected and teachers visited each other’s classrooms, collecting low inference notes to later be analyzed by the teacher. At fall teacher roundtables, teachers each took 45 minutes to review video footage together and share feedback/next steps utilizing a shared protocol (give one/get one, see/think/wonder, teacher doing/student doing) to narrow the feedback. At the end of the cycle, teachers reflect on whether their instructional adjustments were successful by analyzing student work.  In the winter, vertical teams analyzed multiple streams of data to determine areas of need in their departments. All teams utilized a similar protocol starting at low inference noticings before formulating conclusions and asking questions. Based on their findings, teams decided on an approach, and co-created a lesson for teacher 1 to implement while the team-mates observed. The team then revises the lesson and teacher 2 teaches a revised version of the lesson, etc. By the end of the cycle the team should have a shared practice that has been revised multiple times based on the effectiveness of the practice as determined by student data and teacher’s observations. Topics this year include: modeling annotation strategies to improve reading comprehension, developing language skills to boost K-2 writing organization, small group guided 3  reading instruction and k-2 literacy workstations, developing math independence through differentiated station work. The “levels of questioning” practice still lives in the humanities team, 8 years after the lesson study!  During the unit planning cycle in the spring, planning partners refine an aspect of their unit plan (culminating project, real-world connection, standards alignment, essential questions, etc). During a gallery walk, teachers can reflect on vertical alignment and provide feedback for consideration. More feedback from colleagues is shared at Spring Teacher Roundtables after a close review of student work. This year, the inquiry work that teachers do in vertical teams, as described above, will be incorporated into a structured review process, which will be a significant part of each teacher’s MOTP rating as a part of our PROSE status “Option PROSE”. Grade Teams Grade teams are integral in maintaining the organizational effectiveness and culture of high expectations at Arts and Letters. To support this effort in distributive leadership, we have a grade team leader meeting every Tuesday morning where each grade’s leader represents the team. Subsequently, each grade team meets once a week. In grades 5-8, team responsibilities include, but aren’t limited to:  Calendaring and organizing community events (including: Grade specific events, over-night trips, instructional field trips, Curriculum Night, Articulation Night etc.) Formulating a plan for advisory lessons to support SLC goal creation/SLC preparation. Sharing data about students to advisors to prepare for SLCs.    Monitoring progress/sharing successes of student goals identified at SLC’s  Conducting kidtalk weekly (brief) and sharing successful strategies for student support.  Norming transitions, classroom behavior, grade-wide behavioral systems (ASI, out-to-lunch requirements).  Assessing the culture/social-emotional/character needs of the grade and creating systems to promote growth and balance (Community Service Passbooks, Karaoke, Dances, etc.)  Grade teams also lead the school in our anti-bullying and anti-hate speech campaign called Say the Right Thing. All advisories 5th through 8th grades and classrooms from 1st through 4 participate in the door design competition in the winter and the video production competition in May and the sidewalk chalk design challenge in June. Arts & Letters believes that central to our success and the success of any school are opportunities that we create and take advantage of to make our thinking and learning more visible to each other, our students and their families and outside community members. Exhibitions of learning raise the stakes for everyone and require lots of teacher, student and parental engagement. Making learning public in this way is also vital for innovation and to develop greater trust within our school and with our community. With this in mind we need to better memorialize and make public the learnings that come from vertical and grade team inquiries. We hope that in the 2016-2017 school year that we will be able to post a number of inquiry snap shots to our website for all to see. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 4  100% of teachers will create inquiry learning snapshots that capture the focusing questions, inquiry process and findings for all three inquiry cycles for the 2018-2019 school year. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Continue the collaborative work with our Learning Partners schools to share best practices across the nine schools. Dedicate 75% of Monday PD time to vertical and grade team inquiry work with support from administration and leadership interns. Provide opportunities for teachers to commit to professional learning offerings from the District and Borough Field Offices. Co-teacher check in meetings twice a year. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? K-8 teachers All year K-8 teachers All year Principal and model teachers Administration, leadership interns and teachers K-8 teachers All year Teachers All co-teacher pairings Fall and spring Administration and leadership interns How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. At Arts & Letters during the 2018-2019 school year we will run two teacher led parent workshops on reading and mathematics. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will use some of the funding connected with the Learning Partners and MSQI programs to pay for substitutes so that teachers can collaborate with each other in their visits to other schools. The PTA also raises money to be able to send our teachers to national educational conferences. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 6  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Representatives from the administration attend all vertical and grade team meetings. We also help facilitate the grade team leader and vertical team leader meetings. We will continually monitor the norms that the teams set for themselves and the inquiry that they do. The administration will also provide support with the inquiry learning boards. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance Domain 4 Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Since our 2012-2013 School Quality Review, our Superintendent has consistently urged us (myself and my assistant principals) to provide support to teachers so that they are better able to align our home made assessments to our curricula. The Superintendent has also pointed out to us that our teachers need to develop more ways of providing students with more tailored and actionable feedback and use patterns from assessment and feedback data to make smarter instructional decisions. For the past three years the administration has made some changes that we believe have helped us use data better to improve student learning. One on one conferring and the creation of tri-annual benchmark assessments from K through 8th grade have helped us know our students better and give them smarter and more actionable feedback. Starting in the late summer of 2013 we launched into a school wide professional learning initiative around centers, stations and conferencing that was both meant to help us better differentiate our instruction, assess student understanding, and provide structures and opportunities for students to take more and more responsibility for their own learning. We created a guidebook to support the initiative entitled ‘Conferences that Make Sense: The Arts & Letters Guide to Conferring.’ This guidebook has many resources taken from some of the top teachers and writers of inclusion classes and student-centered instruction. Throughout the course of that year and continuing up until now, we have revisited and continued use of conferring techniques to guide instruction. During that school year the administration sponsored a monthly voluntary study group called a Whine and Cheese meeting during which a different section of the guidebook was discussed. Best practices with one on one conferring were also one of the inquiry cycles that teachers researched and tried out in that year. We have found that through this instructional technique we are better able to know our students, ensure that students are seen and heard, and challenge those students that need challenge and support those that need support. The use of conferring has yielded growth in middle grades ELA state test scores and Fountas and Pinnel reading levels. In the lower grades, we have seen students from 1st grade up move at least two levels per grade in part because of the use of conferencing. The math department also adopted conferring that year with the hope of replicating something close to a Fountas and Pinnel tracking for students in math. While they are still working to find a system that works, they have been using one on one time with students to talk about assessments, Scholar’s Challenges and non-traditional problems. This special time that we are planning into our lessons allows us to know our students better and to further push student thinking. 8  In addition to the push for stations, centers and conferring we have spent two vertical team led inquiry cycles over the past two years on whole class formative assessments and checks for understanding. This had us digging deep into Ron Berger’s Book Leaders of their Own Learning, and had us examining his same questions, “How do we know if students really understand?” and “Are students being given time to reflect on their own learning?”. From that grew a movement where we focused on checks for understanding and started to help our teachers build their toolkit of resources; conferring, more writing and reflection across grades and especially around student led conferences and the implementation of protocols for students to help build discussion skills. Teachers now implement a menu of different routines from Whip Shares, exit tickets, give one/get one, fist to five and word sorts and others. All these assessments are invaluable to getting a better understanding of what students are thinking and understanding. Each of the routines is ideally suited for specific moments in a lesson. Much of the inquiry was around the how and more importantly when to utilize a specific method to check for understanding. In the winter of 2014, as part of our process of growing into a complete K-8 school, our lower grade students were approaching state testing for the first time. Most of the families had never experienced standardized testing and had very little information, and a lot of anxiety. In order to help with the process, we organized a testing information night to provide as much information as possible for families. Our third grade teacher team coordinated with our administration to gather resources, and collaboratively we decided to provide honest and unbiased information about both testing and opting out. The third grade teachers co-facilitated the meeting with administration, and it prompted a lively discussion around assessment, teacher evaluation and tracking student progress. Both before and after this informational meeting 3rd grade parents began to organize a strong opt-out movement, and 83% of the 3rd grade families opted out that year. We wanted to continue to build our school’s practice around data and accountability, so in response to the opt-out movement from our parents we decided that we would create our own series of benchmark assessments, which we would align to both our curricular units and Next Generation Learning Standards. These assessments would be given three times a year in math, reading and writing, would be graded on appropriate rubrics and would provide necessary data on student achievement across the year (and from K-8, eventually). From this body of data, we would be able to plan for appropriate interventions, revise instructional practices, and target instruction to specific areas or students. After several planning meetings with our lower grade vertical team leaders, we decided to begin the roll-out in Spring 2014 with grades K-3. These grades were heavily affected by the opt-out movement, and therefore welcomed the idea of a cohesive system to measure progress and growth outside the standardized test. Over the course of the last 5 weeks of the year, grade teams met once a week to create these three assessments in math and writing. At the end of the year, we administered our June Benchmarks and passed them to the next year’s teachers for preliminary data. The following fall, we broadened the scope to include middle grades as well, with the support of vertical team leaders. Our focus with this expansion was vertical alignment and we added science benchmarks in grades 3-8. Vertical teams met in September, October and November to agree to a common structure and layout, and for some areas (math, in particular) they decided to focus on practices/processes as well as content. Specifically, we worked on connecting K-3 and 3-8, and making adjustments to benchmarks to ensure they would yield the right information 9  about student mastery in developmentally appropriate ways. For example, we decided to convert the 1st grade math September benchmark into a math interview so that we could better assess students’ mathematical skills/knowledge without reading skills interfering. Over the course of the year, we administered all three of the benchmarks in each subject area to all of the students in the building. Teams normed and graded these benchmarks during Monday Professional Development, and then we helped teams to create spreadsheets on Google drive to share the results of the benchmarks. By the end of the year, we had the beginning of a body of data on student achievement that was both cohesive across our entire school and authentically linked to our homegrown curricula. At the end of each school year, we use a staff PD to do a “gallery walk” of all the benchmarks in each subject from K-8. Seeing these artifacts all before us, it has been easy to see places where we need to improve alignment, or places where we have gaps in science instruction, or places where our expectations of students jumps a great deal from one grade to the next. We confront questions around whether the genre of the writing should stay constant across the year, whether the math benchmarks should have more content and less process, and whether the reading passages for the writing benchmark should be provided on a student’s reading level to target writing performance (and not reading). For each school year our vertical teams spend time revising benchmark assessments and creating multiple versions to better differentiate them while still getting us data about core skills development. We have also been tuning them in comparison to the state test data to see if there are parallels between the data sets. Our partnership with MSQI has provided support with efficient data gathering techniques and some reading assessment data that have helped the science team to develop non-fiction reading practices in their classes. Our next steps are to continue to develop better practices around using our benchmark data. Our fall inquiry is focused on zooming in on specific demographic subgroups and coming up with interventions to better support our students. This year we will be pushing for more interventions for students with IEPs. Our school needs to provide more time and opportunities for math and reading with our ICT students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 all teachers will participate in three inquiry cycles. Each cycle will ensure that curriculum is vertically aligned K-8 in ELA, science and mathematics. Central to this vertical alignment will be interventions that better meet the needs of students with IEPs. We expect plan to see at least 5% performance gains in benchmark, F & P, DRP and state test assessment data in our IEP population. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The math vertical team will be aligned K-8 during inquiry cycles, with a focus on algebraic thinking and number talks. Reading assessment data will be shared schoolwide. Literacy specialist will work with teachers to implement interventions for struggling readers and SWDs. During the professional dialogue meetings between administrators and teachers will focus on Danielson domain 1E with a focus on meeting the needs of all learners. Teachers will receive support and actionable feedback in Danielson 1E. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Math and science teachers All year Administration and vertical team leaders K-8 teachers All year Administration K-8 teachers All year Administration K-8 teachers All year Administration How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will run a series of workshops about school culture and rigorous instruction here at Arts & Letters. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will use some of our Fair Student Funding to pay teachers to come back at the end of August for three days of professional development around the use of data, benchmark assessments and unit planning. Our PTA will also support our teachers to go to professional learning opportunities outside of the school throughout the year. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 1  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Representatives from the administration attend all vertical and grade team meetings. We also help facilitate the grade team leader and vertical team leader meetings. We will continually monitor the norms that the teams set for themselves and the inquiry that they do. The administration will also provide support with the inquiry learning boards. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance Domain 4 Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Mirroring the work that we have done with students and teachers around being mindful of key cultural forces that create high expectations for thinking here at Arts & Letters, we have done some similar work with our parents. Central to Arts & Letters’ work with young people is the creation and maintenance of a strong partnership with parents. To do this well we need to attend to the use of our face to face time with parents, opportunities we have with them to make the learning here visible, interactions and relationships that are created between families and staff, and expectations that we have for each other. Below are descriptions of some of what we do to make sure that our partnership with parents is strong: In Arts & Letters parent meetings with students and staff you often see:  Carefully constructed protocols for student-led conferences that give the majority of time to student voice.  Teachers meeting with parents before and after school to talk about students.  A majority of time during Parent Teacher Association meetings given to topics of expressed interest from parents (i.e. standardized testing, diversity, special education, math enrichment, and gender inclusivity). Opportunities for parents to communicate with the school and think more about their child’s learning often involve:  The advisor for each 5th to 8th grade student as the main contact from school to home. On any given day, the advisor may contact the parent (or vice versa) in regards to an academic concern or achievement, or a behavioral concern. The advisor is the individual on each grade team that knows that child best and is that child’s best advocate. The advisor is also the one teacher at the table for Student-Led Conferences and the one to ensure that high expectations are communicated and achieved.  The administration and teachers sending all parents a weekly “Parent Blast.” The Parent Blast describes happenings in the building and within the wider educational sphere. Through this communication, parents receive images from classrooms and recess, teacher anecdotes about learning in classrooms, student and faculty celebrations for the week, the word of the week, and book of the week.  Receiving updates from the online grading system jupitergrades, which is shared with parents and students and shows each child’s current progress and the status of assignments in each class. In addition, Jupitergrades provides a way for parents to contact teachers and vice versa when wanting to share concerns or celebrations. 3  Visiting the school website communicates to all constituents the mission and beliefs of Arts and Letters, current events in the school, and an archive of previous Parent Blasts.  Reading the class blog. Many grade teams are in the midst of creating blogs to communicate what is happening in the classroom to parents. Blogs are a timely way for a parent to get a glimpse of what their child learned on a given day, the investigation they participated in, or the experiment they questioned. Our blogs have pictures from the classroom in addition to explanations about activities completed.  Attending a PTA meeting. This year, to help support the work of the Parent Teacher Association (PTA), administration and the executive board of the PTA set themes for each PTA meeting. These themes are varied from conversations about inclusion and diversity to math night and game night. They are held once a month either in the morning or at night. At Arts & Letters the interactions and relationships between teachers and parents are often supported by:  E-mails regularly sent to individual families throughout a given month with updates about learning.  Teacher generated blogs/newsletters with photos and anecdotes about classroom activities and projects.     Class potlucks either in Fort Greene Park or the classroom in the lower grades. Student-led conferences Short check-ins at drop off and dismissal. Shares and Roundtables Routines, structures, and systems at Arts & Letters which convey our expectations for thinking and learning to parents are:  The public exhibitions of learning that have been just described (Roundtables, SLCs, Arts Expo and early childhood Shares) all require parent participation and have scaffolding for parents to support all of the students in a given class (teachers create sample questions, distribute feedback sheets to all adults, and post an agenda on the board so parents have a sense of the timing and requirements for being at the exhibition of learning).  The communication systems of class blogs and Parent Blasts are all intentional ways that we are trying to make the thinking and learning happening in our school more visible to parents and our community.  The hallways of our school are packed with art and student writing. Teachers provide a brief description of the learning moments alongside the learning on display as a way to bring our parents and community into the thinking and learning going on here at Arts & Letters. District 13 is a very economically diverse district and Arts & Letters is an unzoned District 13 school that draws families from every part of it. We want our student population to reflect that diversity. We believe that the learning that happens here in our school is greatly enriched by the different perspectives and backgrounds that this kind of diversity brings. During the 2015-2016 school year Arts & Letters was accepted into a pilot admissions process that has allowed us to prioritize 40% of the available Kindergarten seats for families that qualify for free and reduced lunch. We are very excited to be a part of this pilot. 4  Our PTA and SLT have been supportive of this initiative from the beginning. To further support the success of our integration push the PTA raises money to provide additional teaching aides for our Kindergarten, 1st and 2nd grades. Each classroom in these grades has multiple adults in every classroom. We have pursued and received grants for reading support for our struggling readers. Our commitment to inclusion is long standing and we now have an ICT at every grade level. We also fund and maintain what we call a Student Life Center to support the diverse needs of our students and families. Our PTA has also been helpful in the recruitment that we do by doing targeted outreach to day care centers that cater to low income families. We post flyers promoting tours and presentations in all NYCHA housing sites within the D13 boundary We do presentations at these institutions and have multiple tours of our lower grades classrooms. We hope that this will further promote Arts & Letters with families around District 13. During the 2016-2017 and 2017-2018 school years the faculty and parents will participate in facilitated workshops about race and racism. Racism has been and continues to be a big part of life in the United States. In order to build the community that we want, we all have a lot to talk about and learn about from each other. As Arts & Letters’ Commitment to Inclusion and Diversity reads we must bring the “constant vigilance, revision and patience [that is] required in creating and maintaining a welcoming community. We will need training, renewal and a willingness to change normed practices as well as an openness to creating new traditions.” We hope that the workshops and discussions will aide in our efforts to build and maintain the vibrantly diverse school that we want here at Arts & Letters. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. For the 2018-2019 school year, the percentage of Arts & Letters parents who agree and strongly agree to the Learning Environment Survey prompt “The principal/school leader at this school works hard to build trusting relationships with parents/guardians like me,” will increase five percentage points. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Workshops with Human Root on race and racism. Use of Family Engagement time will be stock piled during the months of Student-Led Conferences to make sure that the conferences last 20 minutes each. Recruitment efforts will be spearheaded by the SLT. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents and faculty Fall K-8 teachers Fall and spring Parents and teachers in SLT Administration and Human Root K-8 teachers and administration Once a month the Family Engagement time will be used by teachers to create and maintain classroom blogs. K-8 Year long Grade teams 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. LEAP and Academic Zone Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. PTA fundraising, Student-led Conferences time allocation via PROSE status, Learning Partners Program funding Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  Advisory will be used as a link between school and home. Advisors are parent’s first line of communication for questions and concerns about students socially, emotionally, and academically. Advisors will also serve as an ally for students as they navigate through Arts & Letters. 6   PTA blog and class website will be used to disseminate information Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Learning Environment Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Wilson reading -30 students Leveled book clubs- 55 students Skill development- 40 students Academic support Social Studies Academic support At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) 5-10 "At risk" students 35 mandated students Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group- four or five students Small group- four or five students Before,during and after the school day Small group- two to three students Small group-three or four During and after school Small group- focused on non-fiction reading Small group- focused on non-fiction reading and research Afterschoolreading and math intervention support. Wilson and Horton Gillingham Small group- no bigger than 7 During and after school Small group- no bigger than 7 One on one and groups of two or three During and after school Before and during school 8  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Not Title 1 schools Not Title 1 schools Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). Not Title 1 schools 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 9  Not Title 1 schools 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. Not Title 1 schools 0  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 1  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 3  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 13K492, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. [School name] will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 4  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 5  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) 13K492, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 6  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 7  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 8  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 9  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 0  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 13 School Name Academy of Arts & Letters Borough Brooklyn School Number 492 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal John O'Reilly Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher N/A Teacher/Subject Area Meredith Jacks Teacher/Subject Area Meghan Casey Related-Service Provider Do not have one Superintendent Barbara Freeman Assistant Principal Meg Crouch Coach N/A School Counselor RJ Weaver Parent Rebecca Ballantine Parent Coordinator Jeff Rivera Field Support Center Staff Member Camila Holmes Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 514 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Total number of ELLs 0 0 3 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 0.58% 1  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 4 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We currently use Fountas & Pinnell and the Gray Silent Reading Test to routinely assess the early literacty skills of our ELLs. Data shows that these students are reading below grade level, not unlike our other high need populations. Understanding this data has allowed us to imbed more language intensive supports into our unit plans. Additionally, these students receive ongoing supports during one-on-one conferencing time with our instructional team. Our three ELLs are also a part of our reading intervention program. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 2  We evaluate the success of our programs for ELLs by measuring their progress on State examinations, such as the ELA and NYSESLAT. In addition, we monitor their progress in their reading levels through the use of Fountas & Pinnell running record. We are also using the DRP reading assessment. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our school has many systems in place to assess, track, and remediate for students not making adequate progress at any point during the year. First, units are designed with assessment in mind. Teachers use Fountas and Pinnell and the DRP reading assessment to track formal reading levels. In addition they regularly assess and track students' progress during reading and writing conferences and administer assessments at the beginning and end of each unit. Detailed records are kept of each of weekly conference. Mid and end of unit math assessments, as well as daily formative assessments, inform teachers as to which students met the objective for the day, and this information is used to create groups as well as additional interventions. In writing, teachers plan conferences across the unit to collect and assess student drafts, and they grade end of unit writing products as well as “on-demand” writing across the year and across subjects. Assessment results are shared with grade-level teams on a quarterly basis. At our school, we identify students at each tier at regular intervals across the year using benchmark assessments; October, February , and May. At this time, teachers develop formal at-risk plans with the input of all appropriate service providers for students at risk of not meeting promotional standards as well as students at risk of not meeting grade level standards. Teachers continually assess all students but especially those at risk to see that interventions are working and if not they are adjusted. Coaches meet on a regular basis with teachers to discuss the progress of these students, and are an integral part of developing the at-risk plans across the year. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Currently, the two ELLs who are in 8th grade are at an advanced proficiency level. These students have plateaued in their English proficiency having achieved an at an advanced level on the NYSESLAT for the last 3 years. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Currently, Arts & Letters implements an inclusion English as a Second Language (ESL) Program The primary goal of the program is to assist students in achieving English Language proficiency as soon as possible. Because we have so few ELLs, and they are on the same grade and proficiency level, these students travel together as part of a larger heterogeneous block of students. b. TBE program. If applicable. 3  Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Currently, we do not have a licensed ESL teacher on staff; however, weekly interventions are provided by our AIS teacher to ensure that the mandated number of instructional minutes are being fulfilled.The goal of our ESL program is to foster full English proficiency in a supportive classroom environment. Specifically, we utilize the following practices: • Collaborative planning between teachers. • Scaffolding is an essential part of the instructional delivery, and we use the “gradual release of responsibility modeling, following the trajectory: “I do it—we do it—you do it together—you do it alone!” • Assisting students during work periods, conferencing with students in and out of class, informal assessments, and running records. • Additional small group AIS sessions for each grade prior to all state assessments, to focus on literacy and academic language. As a small school, our grade teams take extra time to look at the needs of individual students and discuss their needs. In particular, were we to have ELL students, we would need to make sure that these students received extra time for focus, inclusive of the presence of the ESL certified individual. In addition, we ensure that all ESL students are enrolled in our extended-day program, which focuses on reading intervention utilizing small group and individualized instruction. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Goals of the program include: To amplify the literacy and academic skills of ELLs who participate in our program To incorporate recognized and researched based ESL instructional strategies across content subject areas. To give students the skills to perform at city and state grade level in all subject areas 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Because our students are English dominant, we currently do not have a system to evaluate their native language throughout the year. Should our school's population of ELLs increases, then native language assessments such as Fountas & Pinnel or the DRA would be explored for use with our students. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Students arriving as SIFE or newcomers would receive additional intervention, such as word work with phonics and phonemic awareness, vocabulary development and explicit teaching of conventions and mechanics. These students would also receive social and emotional support through advisories and our student life office to help aid in their transition to a new country. ELLs who have been receiving services for 4 or more years would receive vocabulary development and explicit teaching of conventions and mechanics to support what they are learning in the content areas. Close-reading and decoding strategies would also be utilized to help them improve their reading proficiency. The progress of former ELLs would be closely 4  monitored and interventions would be provided for these students as indicated from their formative and summative assessments. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers would have access to a variety of materials that specifically address the multi-sensory needs of ELL-SWD’s. Grade level materials would be created as a by-product of our monthly grade level teams curricula mapping work. Charts, handouts or any curriculum related material could be transcribed and/or translated for students as part of their reading/writing toolkit. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Students would be provided with differentiated instruction based on their individual needs as detailed in their IEP or intervention plans. Intervention and classroom teachers would work collaboratively with related service providers to effectively plan for each student and to incorporate goals and objectives for the student that are reflective of their disability and their needs as English Language Learners. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Paste response to question here: 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Paste response to question here: 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Paste response to question here: 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Paste response to question here: 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Paste response to question here: 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Paste response to question here: 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Paste response to question here: 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Paste response to question here: 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Paste response to question here: 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? 5  Paste response to question here: 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Paste response to question here: Paste response to question here: 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Paste response to question here: Paste response to question here: Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Paste response to question here: 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Paste response to question here: Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 6  7 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, John Oreilly, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 8  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 9  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: School Name: Academy of Arts & Letters Superintendent: Barbara Freeman The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. All parents/guardians of newly enrolled students fill out a Home Language Survey when enrolling their child. This form is maintained as part of the student’s record. If the parent/guardian indicates on the HLIS that they would like to receive information from the school in their home language, forms being sent home are translated either in written form or orally to the parent/guardian. Information from teachers is translated to parents by staff members who speak the home language. There are currently 3 ELLs at the Academy of Arts & Letters. No parent has requested information to be sent home in a language other than English. However, the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit will be utilized if a parent/guardian should request these services. This was indicated on the HLIS as well as confirmed orally by a pedagogue who speaks the parents' home language. During parent orientation, the parents provide requests for language preference and they document their language preference on the emergency contact cards. Parent surveys are distributed in Bengali, the language requested, as well as English which has been requested by the parents. The ATS Report of Preferred Languages is updated regularly in order to maintain accurate information on parent language choices ( RAPO ATS Report). Parent Blue Cards are 0  also updated regularly to keep parent language choices current. Parent surveys are given out by the parent coordinator in order to maintain accurate data on parent language choices. Teachers also send home surveys by backpack or during parent conferences in order to collect parent data by class/grade. A report is generated using a variety of data sets in order to regularly update the languages that parents speak by class and/or grade. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language More than 99 percent of the school’s population reports English as the primary language. The remaining fraction of a percent speak Spanish and Italian. The school’s demographic is made available on the school’s official DOE website and is periodically reported in our school’s newsletter. Teachers whose parents have elected to receive information in their home language have had this information communicated to them by the ENL teacher/coordinator. All parents have requested information to be sent in English. This was indicated on the HLIS. Language needs are met through the utilization of the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 1 How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Documents which are distributed to parents/guardians and require translations are: annual handbooks, parent-teacher conference announcements, ELL parent orientation information letters, NYSESLAT testing notification and calendar, other NYS testing dates, curriculum overview, ELL entitlement and non-entitlement letters, as well as letters from the school leadership. Curriculum information is sent at the beginning of the school year. Testing dates and calendars are provided as soon as they become available in order to allow parent/guardians to prepare themselves as well as their children for upcoming events. Parent's Bill of Rights are distributed as they become available to the school. School annoucements, after school program information, general overview of student curriculum and letters from school leadership is translated in order to keep all parents aware and engaged on all school matters. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? The Academy of Arts & Letters holds four parent conferences throughout the school year. The first, in September, introduces parents to their children's new grade and provides curriculum information. The next three, held in November, March and June are focused on student progress and grades. Our conferences are all student led. The ENL teacher holds a parent orientation for any newly enrolled ELL parent/guradian as well as separate meetings for 2  individual ELL parent/guardians throughout the year. Teachers communicate with parents throughout the year in order to address questions/concerns ad well as any possible issues in or outside of the classroom. If necessary, the guidance counselor and administration will be present during such meetings. If parents want to schedule other meetings than these, we make time for them. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The Academy of Arts & Letters has a multilingual welcome poster hanging in the main entrance to the school building so that everyone that enters the building is aware of language assistance services. Language I.D. guides are kept in at the security office as well as the main office. Information for parents on the N.Y.C.D.O. E.'s translation and interpretation services are available in 10 languages, and is kept at the security desk and main office. Parents' Bill of Rights are sent to the school is a variety of languages and they are distributed upon arrival to all parents who have indicated a preferred language other than English. Here at the Academy of Arts & Letters the school staff are aware of language assistance services provided by the school by using data ( ATS Reports, Blue Cards and Surveys), updated roster of bilingual staff and The Translation and Interpretation Unit Services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 3  Parent surveys are distributed at the beginning of the year which gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services. The ENL teacher also meets individually with all parents/guardians of ELLs and can then also ascertain the needs and concerns that they may have. After such meetings,the ENL teacher confers with the parent coordinator and/or the classroom teachers in order to discuss the needs of the parents/guardians and students. In order to gather feedback from parents, we are creating a focus group of multilingual and multicultural parents to discuss their needs and the needs of their children. We can obtain information to inform our practices in order to improve the quality and availability of services we provide to parents and students. 4 
