 School Name: 23K518 KAPPA V Principal: RONDA PHILLIPS   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Knowledge and Power Preparatory Academy (KAPPA V) 332300010518 6,7,8 School Number (DBN): 23K518 985 Rockaway Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11212 718-922-4690 Phone Number: 718-922-5053 Fax: Ronda Phillips rphilli@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Ronda Phillips Thimoty Dally Rhonda Jordan Lloyd Constable Rockel Holmes NA NA District Information Geographical District: 23 Dr. Miatheresa Pate Superintendent: 1665 St. Marks St., Brooklyn, NY 11233 Superintendent’s Office Address: MPate@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-240-3677 Phone Number: 718-385-3786 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   FSC: 23 Executive Director’s Office Address: Bernadette Fitzgerald Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn NY Bfitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-3954 Phone Number: 718-935-2382 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Ronda Phillips Thimoty Dally Rhonda Jordan Ms. D. Lowe James Rockel Holmes Ms Dixon Mr. Constable Doreth Joseph Jocelyn Figueroa *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Teacher Teacher Parent Parent   Name Natasha Burke Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our Mission is as follows: KAPPA V believes that all students are individuals who are capable of learning so our scholars develop social, academic and intellectual habits that inspi them to become tomorrow’s leaders.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. We foster a nurturing learning environment that supports, challenges and raises expectations for students in Brooklyn. We provide a rigorous, accelerated program that prepares our students for high school, college and life beyond. Students receive 90 minutes of Humanities (ELA & Social Studies combined) instruction each day, including independent reading. All students are required to read a minimum of 15 novels by the end of the school year and write 10 pieces of original writing. KAPPA V students also receive Math instruction each day. Our math program includes the use of manipulatives, charts, and student to student discussions to increase critical thinking skills. All students receive social studies, science and foreign language instruction (Spanish). This enables students to effectively compete for placement in independent or specialized high schools. Students also receive Physical Education, Health, Art, Drama and Technology. Cultural/social activities that increase experiential knowledge for students are inherent components of our program as well as college trips and educational trips. Our extended day program runs from October to April, for two hours after school, two days a week and on Saturdays for three hours. This helps students prepare for the ELA, Science and Math state exams. Students who require additional academic support will receive small group tutoring throughout the school year as well as remediation in English Language Arts and Mathematics on scheduled Saturdays and during extended day hours. Our Instructional Focus is: As we prepare students to meet the demands of the 21st Century, KAPPA V teachers will participate in a continual cycle of actionable feedback. Within each lesson observed, and within each element of learning, teachers will deepen students' critical skills through Questioning and Discussion, Checking for Understanding, Student Self-Assessment and ensuring that students are aware of the steps needed to improve their work and further improve learning. Initiatives in place for 2018-19 school year at KAPPA V:  Pricewaterhouse Coopers (PwC) 5 year financial literacy program entitled “Earn Your Future” grant begun in May 2013. Volunteers from PwC come to KAPPA V every other month for a 2 day series of seminars on financial planning. Each class meets with PwC volunteers on a 3 students to 1 PwC volunteer ratio.  MSQI (Cohort 3) 5 Year Middle School Quality Initiative – Beginning in the 2013-14 school year, a 5 year grant program that is centered on working with the ‘Word Generation Curriculum’. This will increase the vocabulary of all students. This program also provides funding for a KAPPA V Coordinator to administer the program. As a result, a debate team has been formed that has already begun competing with other schools.  City Parks Foundation Education Department – Learning Gardens Science Grant . This 3 year grant provides our 6th graders with the opportunity to grow plants in their class garden at the Brownsville Recreation Center. Along with our science teacher, a teacher provided by the foundation will teach the science behind growing food, soil, atmosphere, etc. This is a ‘hands in the dirt’ project. Free Vision, Hearing and Dental Test for Students - Brookdale Hospital to give our students free vision and hearing exams in the beginning of October. Spirit Day – In September and June, advisory houses kick off a healthy competition among houses where students compete for bragging rights . IO Classroom: Combines data, work-flow and communication to manage the school, help teachers day-to-day and get the school community involved. Also know as Skedula, IO classroom manages your grade-book,    0  assignments, attendance, behavior, report cards and more with integrated and real-time parent/student communications.  Math Night – The first Monday night of the month, parents are invited to come to school at 5:00PM for a 1   hour overview of the topics for the upcoming month in math. Shubert Theatre - Students are exposed to various aspects of creating and performing on stage with the guidance of a professional teaching artist to help them learn the basic dynamics of theatre (Broadway Jr.). Single Shepherd - Under the "Single Shepherd" program, counselors work on an ongoing basis with students and families from grades 6 to 12 to make sure students finish middle and high school and enroll in college. This is our 3rd year working with 2 single shepherds to assist our scholars with their social and emotional growth.  BEACON After-school Program - Students choose from a variety of clubs from Monday through Saturday such as debate, basketball, soccer, table tennis, chess, dance, martial arts, fencing, ELA and Math support, etc. for their extended day sports and arts activities.  Advisory - Students will receive Advisory at least once a week which will focus on developing their social emotional stature. The 7 Habits of Highly Effective Teens, Restorative Practices and Student Led Activities will be the focus during this time.  College Access for All - designed to encourage students to expand their mindset around going to college and to prepare students with the knowledge and resources needed to understand how to navigate their journey to college from middle school.  Algebra for All - Algebra I with opportunity to deepen their understanding of mathematics at their grade level. This initiative will focus particularly on the content that is critical to student success on their grade and essential for later work in Algebra I, and will also expand their repertoire of strong instructional practices. This initiative will work with teachers to minimize any math anxiety they may have and strengthen their capacity to serve as content experts in their schools.  Computer Science for All - Computer Science for All is President Obama’s bold new initiative to empower all American students from kindergarten through high school to learn computer science and be equipped with the computational thinking skills they need to be creators in the digital economy, not just consumers, and to be active citizens in our technology-driven world. Our economy is rapidly shifting, and both educators and business leaders are increasingly recognizing that computer science (CS) is a “new basic” skill necessary for economic opportunity and social mobility.  CHAMPS - Fitness Club, Track and Field, Soccer.  New York City Islanders: KAPPA V has partnered with the NYC Islanders to provide a Hockey curriculum, equipment and clothing for our students.  Urban Advantage (UA) is a standards-based partnership program designed to improve students’ understanding of scientific inquiry through collaborations between urban public school systems and science cultural institutions such as zoos, botanical gardens, museums, and science centers. We believe that their extraordinary scientific and cultural resources convey a true “urban advantage.” Urban Advantage partnerships give students opportunities to conduct hands-on investigations that engage them in science as a way of thinking and investigating rather than simply as a body of knowledge.  Eagle Institute (Mentoring for Boys) - The Eagle Institute is a 3 year Program starting in 2017-18 training and lending support to 5 staff members to change the mindset of adults and children working with African American Boys. This program will follow up to 25 boys starting in 6th grade through 8th grade.  Rogosin Institute: - Educate students on prevention of kidney disease by conducting workshops around making healthy choices. Students are exposed to farmer's market, whole foods, and neighboring organizations that provide healthy choices.  Advisory - A system for shared beliefs designed to strengthen relationships and build community, student voice and cultural pride. The entire school community is separated into smaller populations which are homogeneously and heterogeneously organized around a central concept. Groups meet daily with an adult facilitator, working together within groups to achieve individual and collective success, develop life skills and compete across groups.  Matisse Arts Foundation - KAPPA V was awarded a 5 year arts grant of $500,000 to be distributed over the 5 year period. This grant will enable students to choice from various arts discipline i.e. Dance, Visual Arts, Music, Drama and more. 1   Eric Adams Brooklyn Pipeline: Resources worth $260,000 that will offer students real-world work experience in applying STEAM (science, technology, engineering, arts and mathematics) skills.  Medgar Evers Pipeline: The Medgar Evers College Brooklyn Pipeline is an intentional strategy to seamlessly connect students in the K-12 system to ensure they transition successfully into college and are provided connections to high quality career pathways.  Buddhist Tzu Chi Foundation: Tzu Chi is a non for profit, non governmental humanitarian organization with four major missions: charity, medicine, education and humanistic culture. KAPPA V has started a partnership this year to provide our students with free screenings, doctor visits and eye glasses. We plan to add on additional services each year. This year we have teachers at various levels on the spectrum of teaching practice (novice to expert). We will be using Teach Like a Champion 2.0 to assist teachers in developing their craft. We will be using expert teachers to work with our developing teachers on the Danielson Framework. The focus will be on multiple entry points and pushing students to demonstrate high levels of thinking. Our priority continues to be in the area of Math. Even though we showed growth in this area last year it continues to be an area of intense focus requiring improvement. We will using research based intervention programs to continue to decrease the amount of student performing far below grade level in our school. We have also partnered with Algebra for All to support our teachers in developing their craft. Our challenge this year is to rededicate ourselves to making the changes necessary to push our students to new heights. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We have students on many levels of the spectrum. Students with special needs are served in settings that range from Self Contained, ICT, to SETSS. Some students require additional intensive support in math and reading skills in order to meet grade level standards. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The most progress over the past year was made in the area of providing rigorous instruction for our students. Our focus this year is to deepen students' critical skills across content areas while focusing heavily on Math instruction and providing effective professional development aligned to the needs of all teachers, particularly our Math teachers. 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 23K518 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 228 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 6 10 9 5 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 25 21 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 82.0% % Attendance Rate 80.7% % Reduced Lunch 1.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 2.2% 9.2% 0.4% % Black or African American % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.19 0% 8% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 26.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 11 9 7 90.9% 3.5% 30.7% 87.7% 0.0% 2.6% 2 42% 6.3 7.0% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Needs:  Approximately 27% of our students scored at Level 3 or Level 4 in ELA, and approximately 7% of our students scored at Level 3 or Level 4 in Math, according to NYS testing data from the NYC School Quality Guide.  We need to increase our students’ vocabulary so we are continuing the MSQI curriculum in all academic areas, including math and science thus providing more backup and support in learning the domain specific vocabulary words.  According to our 2017-2018 school's quality guide: 49% of students say that teachers ask difficult questions in class; 38% of teachers say that students respond to challenging questions in class and 54% on challenging test questions.  According to our Quality Review done in 2017-18 school year, our school was rated developing in assessment (2.2). Teachers assessment practice for checking for understanding and students self assessment reflected inconsistencies across classrooms. Strengths:  According to our 2017-2018 school's quality guide: 87% of our students say that they are learning a lot in their classes at their school.  Teachers work in teams to collaborate and analyze data and use the data to inform their instruction.  Math coaching through Algebra for All on Best Practices in the classroom.  Teachers attend targeted Professional Development  The Peer Collaborative Teacher and MSQI grants lend tremendous support to the teachers during the continued implementation of the Danielson Framework and additional instructional support.  We have an attendance rate of 92% which means the students are in their seats learning and working towards their goals.  Teachers attendance rate for last school year was 96%. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 4  By June 2019, all teachers will engage students, including ELLs and SWDs through rigorous instruction by creating opportunities for student engagement through collaboration, inquiry learning, the arts and technology, and student presentations to improve the quality of instruction by measurement of our school decreasing its level 1s by 5% on the state exams. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The research-based instructional programs will include:  In-house Professional Learning Activities will be utilize to show teachers how to use Learning Targets to assess students; Students using self assessment tools; and teachers analyze data periodically to drive their instruction.  Teachers will be engaged in inter-visitation and instructional rounds to strengthen teacher's practice and improve student performance. External experts will facilitate professional development sessions for chosen staff members on:  PD opportunities will be used with teachers coming back to turnkey the knowledge to the staff;  How to use Learning Targets most effectively to teach the most rigorous lessons/units and also as an assessment tool to gage students' progress.  Teacher Teams will use protocols to look at student work and analyze data to inform their instruction. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teachers and Para- Professionals October 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Peer Collaborative Teachers, Teachers teams All Teachers, outside consultants October 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Model Teachers, Teacher Teams Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH) will be highlighted in the design process: SWD teachers, ELL teacher, all teachers October 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, PCT Teachers, SWD teachers  AIS – Using the power standards identified and also the needs identified on assessments to instruct students in areas where they need the most help and modifying task by breaking it into smaller pieces. Small group tutoring – use of set specific goals for instruction.   Push-in/pull-out program – use of set goals for instruction. 6  ELL – Using extensive vocabulary and other visual aids to scaffold techniques allowing access for all. Strategies to increase parent involvement and engagement will be:  monthly parent workshop to introduce them to CCLS standards and how they can help their students achieve success. to have monthly 'Sip and Chat' with the Principal to report progress to parents and have an open forum for parents to voice their concerns and gives suggestions creating a positive and nurturing environment be providing academic transparency throughout the year. to provide student progress reports to parents. at least once before regular Parent Teacher Conference. to collaborate with the School Leadership Team. to hold monthly PTA meetings. to have four parent/teacher conferences over the course of the year.       Community Involvement:   Involve our local politicians in our mission and vision for our school to gain resources. Involve local businesses in our community to enhance the quality of our families. October 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, SLT, Parents Parent Coordinator, Principal, Assistant Principal, SLT, Parents Administrator Team September 2018-June 2019 Local businesses, Senators, Council woman/men 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  Conduct monthly parent workshop to introduce them to CCLS standards and how they can help their students achieve success.  To have monthly 'Sip and Chat' with the Principal to report progress to parents and have an open forum for parents to voice their concerns and gives suggestions.  Parents will be given the opportunity to have an a open classroom visit to observe their child's class once a month.  Math Night/ Science Night  Personnel: Parent Coordinator, Principal, Teacher, Communty Based Organizations. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 7  ● Principal ● Assistant Principal ● Peer Instructional Coaches (PIC’s) ● Teachers ● Model Teacher ● Demonstration Teachers ● Community Based Organization ● Parent Coordinator ● Substitute teachers for possible coverage ● Per Session when possible Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of February 2019, all teachers will create and engage students through at least one performance task and multiple lessons that are rigorous and relevant and framed at the high end of the knowledge taxonomy where students are required to build, create, or generate a project to assess student's learning by evidence of students increasing their ELA and Math BOY score by 10%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Students will be given quizzes, periodic and end of unit assessment. They will also be assessed using the STARS online Assessment at the end of each periodic assessment. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strengths:  According to the School Quality Snapshot, 91% of students said that they feel safe in their classroom/school which is up by 7% from last year.  According to the NYC School Survey, 100% of teachers believes that the adults tell their students they believe they can achieve high academic standards; 90% of teachers believes that the adults teach students how to advocate for themselves and organizational skills needed to be prepared for their next level.  According to the 2017-18 Quality Review, the school is well developed in communicating high expectations to the staff inclusive of training, and a system of accountability; staff communicates and support high expectation for students; communications of and support for families understanding of high expectations for college and career readiness. Needs:  According to 2017-18 School Quality Guide, 31% of students and 38% of staff say that student behave well in class even when the teacher isn't watching.  78% of students felt the schools’ offerings were enough to keep them interested in school. This is lower than the city's average; 41% of students said feel they are treated with respect by their peers. This average is lower than the city's average by 10%.  According to the NYC School Survey, 62% of students agreed that discipline is applied fairly at their school; 39% of students responded that their teachers support them when they are upset; 60% of students indicated that teachers give them personal attention and support which is 12% less compared to the district and 9% less than the overall city. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of students, including ELLs and SWDs, will be engaged in a character education program in order to help them develop strong moral character and become tolerant individuals whose actions reflect five key character traits (Perseverance, Respect, Integrity, Determination and Enthusiasm) that will lead to improving school culture as evidenced by a 10% increase in each of the NYC School Survey indicators referenced in the Needs Assessment. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). School staff will develop a comprehensive character education using "The Highly Effective Habits for Teens." Monthly assemblies will be held with all students. Students will be engaged in monthly self-reflections to assess the impact of the month's activities and identify strategies to continue the work. In addition, weekly character quotes will be included in morning message and enforced by all school staff. Students will receive Merits for exhibiting these character traits and Demerits when the school rules are broken. Students will participate in community service projects throughout the school year. In partnership with the Eagle Institute, staff, parent volunteers, mainly fathers and other community advocates will mentor our male students while all parents will be involved in the execution of this work. Targeted Male Students November 2018 to June 2019 Students will receive Advisory weekly in groups of no more than 15 students. Teachers and Guidance Counselors will be engaged in monthly/weekly community circles to identify ways they can be supportive to students' social emotional needs. All Students September 2018 to June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. 0 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students November 2018 to June 2019 All students October 2018 to June 2019 All Students November 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Guidance Counselor , Dean of Student Life, Social Worker, Teachers Principal, Assistant Principal, Guidance Counselor, Social Worker, Teachers, Para -Professionals Principal, Assistant Principal, Guidance Counselor, Social Worker, Teachers Principal, Assistant Principal, Guidance Counselor, Dean, Social Worker, Parent Coordinator, Teachers All teachers, Counselor, Assistant Principal  Through PTA meetings, Sip n Chat with the principal and one on one conferences with parents by Single Shepherds, Administration and teachers, open discussions around student culture, old and new initiatives, will be discussed. This will engage families on best practices on how to help the school and students. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. All staff members, parent volunteers, various quotes, time set aside for teachers to plan, outreach to communities for service opportunities, monthly scheduled assemblies. Per Session and when applicable Per Diem funding will be set aside to foster this work. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February of 2019, administration will monitor students’ monthly self-evaluation for evidence of program’s impact by evidence of the decrease of incidents reported leading to suspension on OORS by 5% and by number of teacher removals documented by the Dean. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Staff will use the merit and demerit system in place along with section sheets to document incidents and rewards given daily. Administration will create a Student Culture Rubric and use the rubric to conduct school walk- through at least 3 times a year. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Needs:  Approximately 27% of our students scored at Level 3 or Level 4 in ELA, and approximately 7% of our students scored at Level 3 or Level 4 in Math, according to NYS testing data from the NYC School Quality Guide. Increasing student thinking and discussion practices will improve student achievement.   Teachers need to incorporate multiple entry points into their lessons so that all students are engaged.  Teachers need more opportunity to work productively with colleagues.  Students’ vocabulary is limited so we are rolling the MSQI curriculum into all academic areas, including math and science, thus providing more backup and support in learning the domain specific vocabulary words.  As indicated on our NYC School Survey, peer collaboration is at 70% which is 19% less than the district and 20% less than Citywide; 60% of our teachers agreed that teachers at our school design instructional program together; 60% of teachers also agree that teachers make a conscious effort to coordinate their teaching with instruction at other grade levels; 60% of teachers believe that at their school teachers take responsibility for improving their school and are eager to try new things.  According to 2017-2018 Quality Review, across classrooms, student work products and discussions reflect uneven levels of student thinking and participation. Strengths: School has and continues to recruit new and innovative teachers.   The MSQI grants lend tremendous support to the teachers during the continued implementation of the Danielson Framework. Specifically, Danielson Component 3b: Questioning and Discussion Techniques.  According to the NYC School survey, 90% of teachers strongly agreed that the principal/teachers and staff collaborate to make the school run effectively; 95% of teachers believe that the school has a cultural awareness to foster inclusive classroom environment.  According to the 2017-2018 Quality Review, school leaders support the development of teachers with effective feedback to teachers that accurately captures strengths, challenges, and next steps using the Danielson framework for teaching.  We provide students with rigorous and engaging educational experience.  We use various ATLAS protocols to engage our staff and scholars. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2  By the end of June 2019, 100% of teachers will work in teacher teams to plan, analyze and conduct deep analysis of data with actionable steps at the end of each assessment cycle. This will be measured by the increase of 15% as evidenced by the 2018-2019 NYC School Survey. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Time will be built in to the teachers regular schedule to meet as a team at least twice a week. Teachers will be held accountable for implementing action steps by creating a bi-monthly calendar to follow up. On-going professional development calendar aligned to Data Driven Instruction Plan to address the needs of evidence from the data analysis. Teams will Identify and implement best practices from high achieving teachers and schools through visits and shared resources. Teacher teams will plan and conduct common interim assessment 4 times a year. ELL and Special Ed teachers will incorporate the strategies from the PLO’s in:  Using Learning Targets to break down the standards into child friendly language.  Modifying the work by breaking it into smaller pieces.  Use of diagrams, graphics and pictures.  Use of graphic organizers to help breakdown information.  Revising the curriculum using scaffold techniques to allow access for all. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teachers September 2018- June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Peer Collaborative Teachers, Grade Leaders Teachers, including SWD and ELL teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Peer Intervention Teacher, ENL Teacher 4  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be engaged through Sip -n -Chat with the Principal, one on one meeting with administration, meeting with teachers and at PTA meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Principal ● Assistant Principal ● Peer Collaborative Teachers ● Dean of Student Life ● Outside PD support personnel ● Parent Coordinator ● Substitute teachers for possible coverage. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, Administration will gather data from all data analysis meeting to track the growth/lack of growth and put systems in place for adaptation and implementation on new strategies as evidence of student achievement growth of 10% on the interim assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Quizzes, end of unit exams and STARS interim assessment results. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths:  According to the School Quality Guide, 97% of parents strongly agreed that the principalschool leader promotes family and community involvement in the school.  According to the NYC School Quality Guide 2017-18 survey results: 100% of teachers agreed that the school leader encourages feedback through regular meetings with parents and teachers; 100% teachers believe that the Principal understands how children learn; 100% believes that the Principal sets high standards for children, 100% believes that the principal carefully tracks student academic progress; and 100% believes that the Principal knows what's going on in the classroom.  According to QR 2017-2018, the school leader consistently conveys high expectations to staff through ongoing feedback and professional learning aligned to the Danielson Framework for Teaching. The school provides ongoing information to families regarding student progress towards college and career readiness. Communication from school leaders and teachers provides opportunities for families to understand student progress towards meeting standards.  According to QR 2017-18, across classrooms, teachers use or create assessments and rubrics that are aligned with the school's curricula. The school uses common assessments to determine progress toward goals across grades and subjects.  According to QR 2017-18, the majority of teachers are engaged in structured, inquiry based professional collaborations that promote the achievement of school goals and the implementation of Common Core Learning Standards. Teacher teams consistently analyze assessment data and student work for students they share, on whom they are focused.  According 2017-18 PPO, KAPPA V's area of celebration is 1.4 which indicates that the school maintains a learning environment that is nurturing and promotes students success. Needs  According to the 2017-2018 PPO, the school needs to refine its curricular and academic tasks using student   work products and data considering the needs of all learners including ELLs and SWDs. It was indicated on the PPO that KAPPA V student performance in Math on the NYS Assessment has been a down ward slope since 2012. Students are scoring at the lower levels of the rubric on their short and extended response on the state exams. Part 2 – Annual Goal 6  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, administration will strengthen their ability to lead via modeling best practices and nurturing the professional growth of staff by conducting at least one professional development session per month, resulting in at least 85% of teachers fully implementing the strategies learned as evidenced by at least 0.5 gains in the average teacher rating on Questioning and Discussion Techniques, and Assessment on the Danielson Rubric. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Provide Research Based Professional Development around critical thinking strategies, student self assessment and text based evidence. Teachers, Teacher Assistants Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal , Assistant Principal, Lead Teachers  Provide feedback to teachers based on informal and formal walk through, 5 minutes snapshots with immediate feedback.  Have teachers share best practices among other teachers. * Provide research based professional development from outside sources to move teachers practice.  Mentoring and coaching new teachers by using model teachers to help implement strategies. Teachers, Teachers Assistants New Teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Professional CBOs Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administration, Lead Teachers  Weekly meetings with staff which include professional development on best practices for teachers and staff. Teachers, staff Sept. 2018 -June 2019  Engage teachers in inter-visitation and instructional Teachers rounds in other classrooms and schools to observe and share best practice. October 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Lead Teachers Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. KAPPA V will continue to update parents through our various methods of communication (IO Classroom, Sip-n-Chat, PTA Meetings, School Messenger, SLT etc.) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 8  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administration, lead teachers, professional literature, per session and per diem funding, Monday PD time, Common preps Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all teachers will be held accountable for implementing professional development given on "Using text based evidence to support arguments in discussions" as measured by at least 65% of teachers receiving effective or highly effective on Danielson's 3B - Discussion Techniques and 3D- Assessment and students' periodic assessment short and extended response average results increasing by at least 1 point. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. This will be measured through formal and informal observations, and by monitoring student performance on periodic assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths:  According to 2017-18 School Quality Guide: o 95% of parents are satisfied with the education the education their child has received - this is comparable to both city and district averages. o 94% of our parents said they have strong families-community ties. o 84% of parents say that they have communicated with their child's teacher about their child's performance. o 88% of families say that they have seen their child's project, artwork, homework, tests, or quizzes. o 75% of parents said that the school communicate with them in a language and in a way that they can understand.  According to the 2017-2018 Quality Review, communication from school leaders and teachers provides opportunities for families to understand student progress towards meeting standards.  Needs:  According to the NYC School Survey, 63% of parents responded that they had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school. Low parent engagement during PTA Meetings and other family functions.   Need more family involvement for school functions. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. KAPPA V will engage parents in daily IO classroom activities, monthly open school sessions, and multiple workshops on topics including but not limited to 'How to read an IEP? 'How to interpret your child's report card?' 'Strategies to help your Special Needs Student' , to increase parental involvement in school functions of at least 30% of parents attending one single event. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Parents will be given the opportunity to visit their child's classroom once a month with a choice of morning or afternoon to observe instruction. (Monthly Calendar) School Messenger will be utilize to improve communications with parents regarding important announcements. Notices will be distributed in multiple languages to ensure access for all parents. IO Classroom will be used as a communication tool for parents, students and teachers. Parents can log on and see their student's progress, as well as monitor areas of need. Students can track and monitor their own progress, helping them to grow independent and take ownership for their own learning. Administration, teachers, counselors and parent coordinator will offer a series of workshop on various topics (IO Classroom, Math Night, CCLS Standards, Reading Readiness Strategies, Social and Emotional Growth of a Middle Schoolers etc.) to provide parents the opportunity to better support their children. Teachers and parent coordinator will consistently monitor and update the school's website to ensure that families have access to information. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Parents Parents October 2018-May 2019 Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Teachers , Parent Coordinator, and administrators Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 Parents,Teachers, Students Teachers, Administrators Parents Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers, Counselors, Parent Coordinator Parents Ongoing Teachers and Parent Coordinator If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Rogosin Institute, Brownsville Community Gardens and collaboration with our local supermarkets and will be engaging our parents in a series of workshops around healthy eating, healthy living and possibly entrepreneurship. 1  The Matisse Foundation will be working with our parents on how to tap into their artistic talents by offering various parent engagement activities. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Parent Volunteers, Community organizations, various communications systems such as School Messenger, IO Classroom, School Website and other social media platforms. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February of 2019, the school will gather data on PTA meetings and other school functions to monitor attendance at family events as evidenced by at least 20% of parents in attendance. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance at all family functions between September to February. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Classroom Observation, test scores, PPT Classroom Observation, test scores, PPT Classroom Observation, test scores, PPT Classroom Observation, test scores, PPT During school hours Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Word Generation, Scholastic Code X, Small Group and one to one Tutoring Reading a-z, Writing a-z, Websites, Writing Program, ENGAGE NY GoMath,XL websites, Finish Line,CCLS Math Workbook, ENGAGE NY Pearson,hands on projects Small Group and one to one Tutoring Small Group and one to one Tutoring Holt, McDougal, hands on project Small Group and one to one Tutoring When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Extended Day, Saturday Academy, AM & PM Tutoring Extended Day, Saturday Academy, AM & PM Tutoring Extended Day, Saturday Academy, AM & PM Tutoring Monday through Friday during school hours At-Risk Counseling, 7 Highly Effective Habits of Teens Small Group and one to one Tutoring, Advisory Monday through Friday during school hours 3  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Currently we have 24 students in Temporary Housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Funding is set aside for uniforms, supplies, doctors visit, special trips and extended day programs. Professional Development will be given to parents. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 4  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 5  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. We will utilize the following means and methods: a) In collaboration with our Borough Human Resources Director we will recruit teachers qualified to do the job. b) KAPPA V has a hiring committee in place, and administrators attend hiring fairs to make as-needed selection of staff c) Administrators will provide consistent and frequent feedback on teaching practice and engage in reflective conversations with staff regarding next steps. d) Highly qualified teachers are given the option to become lead leaders that receive extra funding on their regular salary. e) Teachers are given the opportunity to showcase their craft by having inter-visitation from their peers and other pedagogues outside of KAPPA V. f) Teachers are given the opportunity to attend professional development given by the Brooklyn Field Support Center and other professional organizations, Some teacher also receive in-house professional development given by the BFSC and other paid professionals. g) When possible, funding is set aside to hire Model and Peer Intervention Teacher giving those who qualify an extra stipend on their salary. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). 6  Professional Development is given every week by an administrator, our Peer Collaborative Teachers, outside personnel or outside teacher mentors. Professional Development is based on the needs of the teacher and is therefore differentiated based on content and specific needs. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Not Applicable 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Not Applicable Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Not Applicable 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. With the aid of a team, an assessment calendar is created and the team consisting of teachers and administrators makes the decision on what assessment will be used for each assessment period. The team also decides what sources of assessment will be used as the promotional criteria for each grade. Teachers are trained on how to analyze the assessment results, and how to plan for a re-teach if students did not show mastery. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools 7  Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Federal 157,926 0 0 0 Tax Levy (FSF) Local 1,427,524 Column A Verify with an (X) X NA NA NA X Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5, 5C, 5E NA NA NA Section 5, 5B, 5C. 5D, 5E. 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use. 8   A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 9  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Kappa V, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. KAPPA V will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology. ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 0  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); 1  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) KAPPA V, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 2  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 3 I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); 4  ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 5  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 23 School Name KAPPA V Borough Brooklyn School Number 518 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Ronda Phillips Coach Kathryn Wierzbowski ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ms. Hargraves Teacher/Subject Area Lloyd Constable - ELA Teacher/Subject Area Thimoty Dally - Special Educat Related-Service Provider Tatiana Dixon Superintendent Miatheresa Pate Assistant Principal Laura Edwards Coach Joycinth Shaw School Counselor Alelia Doctor Parent Parent Coordinator Melanie Mendonca Field Support Center Staff Member Lauren Levine Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 6  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 229 Total number of ELLs 4 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 1.75% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 4 3 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 1 7 2 8 1 9 10 11 12 0 1 2 1 0 0 0 0 Tot # 4 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? For all ELLs new admits to our middle school, we look at their test history, using information on ATS. When an ELL student is admitted, our ENL specialist runs ATS reports to learn their test history, NYSESLAT modalities results, years of service, and SIFE status. This information informs us about students’ English proficiency levels, and about which skill areas ought to be prioritized, and helps guide ENL instruction in our school. Again, we have very few ENLs in our school, so results are evaluated individually. Classroom teachers are provided with students' test results from previous years' state tests, students take the MOSL, DRP diagnostic beginning of year assessment in all content area. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 7  During Grade Meeting, teachers on each grade have discussions around additional support to our sub groups and share strategies that work for individual students. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We constantly monitor the progress of our ELL student through rigorous assessment in all subject areas. During our teacher team meetings, teachers have the time to go over data and plan instruction collaborative to ensure the academic success of our ELL students. Teacher observation notes are reviewed as well as formal and informal class assessments. All content area teachers give a brief report about the ELL student's strengths and weakness in that particular class. The goal is to work collaborative to support his learning. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? During Grade Meeting, teachers on each grade have discussions around additional support to our sub groups and share strategies that work for individual students. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] We are a 6-8 school, this does not apply to us. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Because our ELL population is so small, there are no statistically viable trends. In general, we have seen that our ELL students tend to be stronger in listening/speaking skills than in reading/writing. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? During Grade Meeting, teacher s on each grade have discussions around additional support to our sub groups and share strategies that work for individual students. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The ELL student at KAPPA V follow the program set for their assigned classes, with weekly instructional periods that meet all NY City and State regulations in ELA, math, science, social studies, foreign language, PE, and the arts. Major subject area teaching periods range from five to ten periods per week. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not Applicable c. DL program. If applicable. Not Applicable 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 8  Instruction is provided entirely in English. A part-time ENL specialist provides pullout services three days per week, according to the number of minutes mandated by students' proficiency levels as indicated by their most recent NYSESLAT scores. Our ELL student receives pull-out instructional time, and occasional push-in instructional time, with the ENL teacher for 180 minutes a week. Students are pulled out for either individual and/or small group instruction, in order to meet their mandated minutes of ENL instruction for their proficiency level as determined on their most recent NYSESLAT. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. We have only one ESL program model in our school for our one ELL student; we do not have a bilingual nor a dual language program. Classroom teachers with ELLs in their classes include native language books in their classroom libraries and encourage ELL students to read these books to support native language development. Content area teachers provide considerable scaffolding to support ELL students, including using sheltered English, graphic organizers, cooperative learning, and specific vocabulary instruction. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Not Applicable 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Our teachers differentiate instruction by offering constant scaffolding, frequent review, and personalized attention during class times. All teachers include in lesson planning: activation of prior knowledge, use of graphic organizers, vocabulary development, writing instruction and frequent assessments. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Not Applicable 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Ou ENL SWDs students are receiving differentiated instruction from their classroom teacher. ENL students also receives pull-out / push-in services from an ENL Teacher. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our school uses data from standardized assessments (NYS, NYC, and school-wide benchmarks) to help determine appropriate intervention programs for all students. The results consistently indicate to us that what is needed are interventions with strong focus on the development of reading and writing skills across the curriculum. We recognize this as a school-wide need; many KAPPA students read below grade level. Our curriculum preparation includes AIS, focusing on specific reading programs for students. We have instituted small-group tutoring sessions during the school day for all students who scored 1 or 2 on the NYS ELA test last year. Our ENLs are all in that category. Strategies that work well for our struggling native English language readers are also helpful for ELL students. 9  We are committed to providing academically rigorous instruction for our ENL students, utilizing various scaffolding techniques and instructional methodologies to differentiate instruction in the content area classes: use of graphic organizers, building on prior knowledge, lab inquiry in science, audiovisual materials, environmental learning (field trips), manipulatives in math classes, computer technology in all subject area classes, differentiated reading materials, collaborative assignments. Our ESL specialist meets regularly with ELLs' content area teachers. All instruction in KAPPA V is in English. On some years we might have one ENL/SWD who is mandated to have a bilingual para assist them in the classroom; on those years, the para provides bilingual support interventions, working one on one. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We are incorporating more visuals and visual thinking strategies to ensure that our ENL students get the best out of their learning experience. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? For the upcoming year, we are not planning new programs. The ENL population is negligible in our school, never comprising of more than 1 or 3 % of the student body at the most. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our ENL students have equal access to all school programs, events, and services. We have no bilingual classes and no self-contained ENL classes. Our ENL students are given the options to participate in all KAPPA V's extracurricular activities, including Beacon and PAL community programs. There are no special after-school/supplemental programs offered exclusively to ENLs here because we have so few ENLs. Our ENL students are encouraged to attend after-school and Saturday academic programs in ELA and math, that are meant to support all students to reach grade-level achievements on state tests. ENL students also participate in college preparedness activities, and all field trips. All school support structures are available to our ENLs: technology in the classrooms, media center and school library, tutoring, Saturday Academy, after-school programs. All ancillary services provided to students with IEPs are provided to our ENLs with IEPs as mandated: speech, guidance, and resource room. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Our ENL students are currently in seventh and eighth grade. All teachers receive ongoing PD and coaching to help differentiate instruction and assessment. Instructional materials that help support struggling readers are used in all content areas in all classes; most of our general education students are also reading below grade level. Teachers use data from Performance task and state exams to work with students in small group to master specific standards covered on test. Teachers use online differentiated literacy during class time to support all students, including ENLs. Content area teachers have books in native languages in their classroom libraries, and ENL students are encouraged to read them. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Because we have so few ENLs (actually one this year), and no newly arrived immigrant students, we do not offer programs specific to newly enrolled ENLs before the start of the school year. If our demographics change in the future, we will consider implementing such programs. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. KAPPA V is a middle school; all our programs, resources and supports are specific to this age group. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We hare our building with 3 other schools. Our school share the same ENL teacher. Our ENL students are in the in sixth and eighth grade. All teachers receive ongoing PD and coaching to help differentiate instruction and assessment. Instructional materials that help support struggling readers are used in all content areas in all classes; most of our general education students are also reading below grade level. Teachers use data from Performance task and state exams to work with students 0  in small group to master specific standards covered on test. Teachers use online differentiated literacy during class time to support all students, including ENLs. Content area teachers have books in native languages in their classroom libraries, and ENL students are encouraged to read them. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Because we have so few ENLs (actually two this year), and no newly arrived immigrant students, we do not offer programs specific to newly enrolled ENLs before the start of the school year. If our demographics change in the future, we will consider implementing such programs. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? All KAPPA V students take Spanish as a foreign language. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not Applicable Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Our certified ENL specialist participates in district, regional, cluster, network, and city-wide professional development for ENL teachers. She consults with classroom teachers on how to meet the needs of ENLs in the content area, offering ideas for differentiation and language development support. Teachers of self-contained special education classes, which serve most of our ENLs, also participate in school-wide, district, and network PD for ENLs. Additionally, the ENL specialist will offer PD's to classroom teachers of our ELL student. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. When we have ENLs in the eighth grade, they receive support from our guidance counselor to help navigate the high school admission process, and to prepare for the transition to high school. Our ENL specialist also works with Grade 8 ENL students making sure that they and their families understand how to use the high school directory, how to select high school choices, and how to correctly fill out their high school applications. She reviews the eighth grade ENLs' high school applications with them, before they are returned to the guidance counselor. Classroom teachers, our parent coordinator, community workers, and the office staff who work with our incoming 6th grade, are supported by our school administration in helping these students learn school routines and discipline. When a language other than English is indicated on the Home Language survey, and when parents have requested translated school communications, letters sent home by teachers are translated, either using DOE translation services, or by a staff member fluent in the language. Professional development sessions are held weekly for all teaching staff, as well as on designated city-wide PD days, that 1  include instructional differentiation for ELL students. All school staff, including pedagogues, administrators, secretaries, guidance, community workers and parent coordinator are invited to participate in ENL professional development. ENL/Bilingual Teachers are provided additional PD through Brooklyn North Field Support Office. Copies of all PD agendas and attendance are kept in the Principal's office. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The ELL Teacher meets with the parents individually at least 3 times a year, to discuss goals and progress/lack of progress made by students. Translation is available at all meeting. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. We offer "Math Nights" and "Technology Nights" for parents to come to school and 'learn' what their children are learning. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Ronda Phillips, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 3  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: KAPPA V School DBN: 23K518 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Ronda Phillips Title Principal Laura Edwards Assistant Principal Melanie Mendonca Parent Coordinator Hargraves ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Lloyd Constable - ELA Teacher/Subject Area Thimoty Dally -SPED Teacher/Subject Area Kathryn Wierzbowski Joycinth Shaw Coach Coach Alelia Doctor School Counselor Mia-Theresa Pate Lauren Levine Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/22/18 6/22/18 6/22/18 6/22/18 6/22/18 6/22/18 6/22/18 6/22/18 6/22/18 6/22/18 6/22/18 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 4  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 23K51 School Name: KAPPA V Superintendent: Dr. Mia Pate The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We use the data from home language surveys, blue cards, and we conduct a survey to find out additional information about students and parents. As a team we go over the data and make decisions about how best to meet the needs of the community as it pertains to language and translation 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 5 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Spanish 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Student orientation handbook, Parent Handbook, Beginning of Year Surveys, Parent Newsletters, Monthly Calendars, School Closing Notices, Holidays, Parent Teacher Conferences Information and Scheduling Documents, Trip Slips, After School Program Applications, Testing Notices, Report Cards and Progress Reports 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Meet the Teacher, Parent Teacher Conferences each semester, Monthly SLT Meetings, Parent Orientations, Weekly Parent Engagement meetings and phone calls, High School Matriculation and Articulation, During the month of June, graduation parent meetings, Academic probation meetings each semester, 6  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Translated versions of Parent Bill of Rights and Family Guides are distributed (in the beginning of the school year and/or at registration) to those parents that are non-English dominant, based on their Home Language Survey. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent Surveys, School Leadership Team Meetings, PA Meetings, Sip and Chat with the Principal (Monthly), talking regularly to parents and student. 7 
