 13K527 School Name: URBAN ASSEMBLY INSTITUTE OF MATH AND SCIENCE FOR YOUNG WOMEN Principal: KIRI SOARES   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: 331300011527 6-12 283 Adams Street 718-260-2300 Section 1: School Information Page School Information Urban Assembly Institute of Math And Science for Young Women School Number (DBN): 13K527 718-260-2301 Fax: Phone Number: Jen Cusa jenc@uainstitute.org Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Kiri Soares Damon Noland NeQuan McLean NeQuanMcLean Angela Best Tiara Coleman Stephanie Secaira Vanessa Santiago Affinity Schools CUNY/UA Geographical District: Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Fred Walsh Superintendent: 333 7th Ave Room 715, NY, NY 10001 fwalsh@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-356-7514 Phone Number: 212-356-7514 Fax:   Field Support Center (FSC) Affinity Group-UA Alexandra Anormaliza FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street, Room 606 aanorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-5618 Phone Number: 718-935-5618 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Kiri Soares Damon Noland NeQuan McLean Courtney Lemm Angela Best TBD - waiting for student elections in November TBD - waiting for student elections in November Vanessa Santiago Elena Brollo 6th Grade Parent TBD 9th Grade Parent TBD *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Parent   Name Other Parent TBD Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Through a combination of rigorous STEM-focused academic instruction with strong social-emotional development, the mission of UAI is to empower students to successfully complete college and to competitively engage in careers that will enable them to improve their social, political and economic standing.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. We have about 500 students from grades 6 through 12 and the large majority of our young women live in Brooklyn. Demographically, our students are 73% Black, 12% Hispanic, 10% White, and 5% Asian. About 72% of our students qualify for free or reduced lunch, and 7% are English Language Learners while about 18% have individualized education plans. UAI has a strong commitment to achieving our goals through rich partnerships with our community members. NYU Tandon School of Engineering and Girls Inc. are two of our founding partners that provide our students with access to college classes, a full array of health and social supports, and a diverse enrichment program aimed at empowering our young women and rounding out our school offerings that enrich the whole child. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. In addition to the specific demographics presented above, our student population is comprised only of young women. With a focus on developing their interest and capacity in STEM fields, UAI provides a protected environment that nurtures female students towards the pursuit of their interests in math and science. Many of our students arrive at UAI under-prepared for middle school or high school. Our average entering 9th grade proficiency in ELA is 2.23 (vs. the city average of 2.69) and an average proficiency in math of 2.66 (vs. the city average of 2.90). Our average entering 6th grade ELA proficiency is 2.54 (vs. the city average of 2.83) and for Math, it is 2.67 (vs. 2.79 for the city). For our both entering grades, students arrive well below proficiency in both Math and ELA. Because so many of our incoming students arrive at UAI multiple grade levels below where they should be in both reading and math, we focus on strategies and programming that rapidly catch them up to grade level and maximize their opportunities for future college and career achievement. With respect to literacy, we have partnered with the Literacy Design Collaborative and the Middle School Quality Initiative to target literacy development in all grades, with particular focus on grades 6-9. Across multiple subjects in grades in all grades, students In our middle school, we have In grades 6-9, students have additional class periods in math and literacy. On top of the extra time, UAI uses targeted skill-based instruction to grow students foundational skills in both math and literacy. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. In 2017-2018, a major goal was focusing on the development of quality instruction through planning and preparation across the school. Using a combination of professional development supports including New Visions Science and Social Studies PD, the Literacy Design Collaborative, and consultants from the Artisan Teaching model, all teachers were engaged in elevating their skills in lesson planning and execution. As a result, student intellectual engagement and academic achievement improved, as evidenced by a growth in Danielson Domain 3 and student grades. In line with our mission, our Social-Emotional learning structures (direct instruction in incoming grades, small groups in other grades, and teacher PD) enhanced this growth. Together, our intense focus on instructional improvement combined with our refined work with our SEL programs (also known as the Resilient Scholars Program) resulted in both academic and cultural growth for our students and school. School Survey results echoed this growth in both Rigorous Instruction (10% increase from a 2017 average of 2.35 to 2.58 in 2018), Supportive Environment (32% increase from 2.14 to 2.83), Strong Family Ties (4% increase from 3.20-0  3.32) and Trust (7% increase from 3.41 to 3.66). [Need to still insert academic growth from Regents and Credit Accumulation] Despite this growth, we also experienced some dips in our performance in 2017-2018. While the focus on individual classroom instruction has major impact on student achievement and family satisfaction, teachers missed working together in larger groups. While it was an intentional leadership choice to develop individual skills, the larger purpose of this work didn't fully take root in teacher minds until they could see the product of their yearlong struggles at the end of the year. As a result, Survey Results in Collaborative Teachers (22% dip from 3.77 to 2.95) and Effective School Leadership (23% dip from 3.91 to 3.00) dipped in large part due to teacher responses and negative ratings on Teacher Teams and School Leader Decisions on the School Quality Review. For the 2018-2019 school year, we will continue to focus our efforts on improving quality instruction. However, now that teachers have had the opportunity to improve individual skills for their own classrooms, they are now ready to work in larger teams more effectively. We will be creating larger learning group, still focused on planning (e.g. subject teams) to improve collaborative structures and subsequent understanding of how student achievement and parent satisfaction link to their work and efforts in the classroom. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 13K527 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08,09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 480 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 2 2 8 10 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 24 22 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 85.0% % Attendance Rate 79.6% % Reduced Lunch 8.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.6% 14.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 11.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 8.09 3% 18% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 42.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 80% 73% 76.8% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YES No N/A 83 85 88.7% 5.8% 16.7% 64.2% 9.0% 1.5% 4 21% 6.5 30.9% 32% 76% 73% 90.4% 31% N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths Our greatest indicator of student achievement and success is the one that is best aligned with our mission. Eighteen months after graduation, 87% of our alumni are still enrolled and attending college. Our mission has never been to simply graduate students from high school. Our goal has always been equipping our students with the academic and social-emotional skills required to thrive and complete college. This success is the result of a strong system of academic and social-emotional instruction, key partnerships that provide variety of extra-curricular experiences and access to college-level courses, and college advising, individually tailored to students and families to ensure the best possible college match for our alumna. Needs To further our success College Persistence, we are aiming to increase the percent of students who match and remain enrolled in 4-year colleges and universities and increase the percentage of students who match and enroll in competitive 4-year colleges and universities. In order to do so, we need to grow the work of our College Office and expand our College and Career Awareness and Preparation to span all 7 grades. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will effectively increase the level of rigor across classes to optimally prepare students for success in college. This will be evidenced by a 5% increase in the Survey average for Rigorous Instruction and a 5% increase of students graduating College and Career ready in Math and ELA. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 6th - 12th Grade Math, ELA, Science, and Social Studies Daily Practice - SEP2018 through JUN2019 All Social Studies, Math, ELA, and Science Teachers, Principal, AP, and Lead teachers  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  College Access for All - Growing our College-Going Culture Program Component: Increasing Academic Rigor & Student Engagement Using the Artisan Teaching Model, Science, English, Math and Social Studies teacher teams will engage in daily meetings to improve instructional planning, focusing on questioning, assessment, and student thinking. In partnership with the Literacy Design Collaborative (LDC), ELA teachers will engage in daily meetings and biweekly meetings with an LDC instructional coach to improve instructional planning, focusing on student thinking, assessment, and providing actionable feedback on student work. College Access for All - Growing our College-Going Culture All students and families Program Component: Increasing School-wide College Awareness To develop a broader and more pervasive awareness of college and to create a stronger college-going culture, our College Access for All planning team will plan and implement a series of activities and events throughout the course of the year to bring awareness to the college process and student achievement in this process throughout the school. Historically, the awareness and understanding of the college College Access for All Planning Team: College Counselors, Teachers, Supervising Social Worker, and Principal 3 Events in the Fall (September, October, November2017) and and 3 Events in the Spring (March, April, and May 2018) 4  process were limited to our upper grades (11th and 12th). This year the goal is to take it schoolwide. Key Events: Curriculum Night, College Access for All Week, (2) Student Led Conferences & College Readiness, College Match Day, P/SAT Day and Spirit Week Lead Up and more. College Access for All - Growing our College-Going Culture Program Component: College Matriculation To further enhance our achievements with college matching and student persistence in college, we will continue our high-quality counseling and individual support for families and students. Key activities include College Night - Parent Orientation to the College Process FAFSA Night- Individual support for Parent/Student application for Financial Aid Tailored Counseling - One-on-one counseling in college selection (both with students and with students and families) School Visits - Overnight trips to various colleges and universities Application Support and Advocacy - Individualized application support and advocacy for seniors Junior Year Prep - Student recommendation, college essay, and Introduction to the college process Resilient Scholars Program: Direct Social-Emotional Instruction Deliver direct instruction using School Connect Curriculum to develop explicit social-emotional learning skills. Provide targeted instruction (small group) for students indicated as high need as per the DESSA Student Led Conferences All juniors and seniors and their families Key events occur throughout the year College Counselors, Supervising Social Worker, Teachers, and Principal Incoming 6th and 9th grade students (class) and other grades as needed (targeted small groups) Students Counselors, Supervising Social Worker, Interns, Teachers, and Principal 2-3 times per week in incoming grades (6 and 9) and at least 1x per week for groups November and March Students, Advisors and Families 5 Student-led conferences build student ownership and autonomy over their learning. This year, SLCs will be structured to guide student reflection relative to college readiness - both academically and social-emotionally. Through both conferences in November and March, students will use academic and SEL data to set goals and gauge progress towards college-ready benchmarks (in Math, ELA, and SEL performance, as per the DESSA). Students & Teachers Ongoing and End of Terms (Jan and Jun) Students and Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. All students are assigned to an advisor (at a ratio of 12-15 students per advisor). At least one time each marking period, advisors convene a meeting to provide an update on student academic and social-emotional progress towards college-readiness goals. The frequency and substance of these meetings are differentiated to student need. Timeline: Advisors meet weekly with advisees (SEP2018 through JUN2019). Each advisee meets at minimum once per marking period with Advisor and Parent (in addition to Student Led Conferences - so 6 meetings plus 2 SLCs per year). Implementation and Oversight: Advisors record outcomes of meetings in Anecdotals on Skedula. Student progress (and thus priority for meeting frequence) are revisited with student data (attendance, grades, schoolwide assessment data) each marking period. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Staffing – 35 Classroom Teachers, 2 Guidance Counselors, 2 Social Workers, 2 Partner Staff, 2 deans Scheduling - Circular 6R assignments are all co-planning, Familiy Engagement time is structured by Advisory, Per Session available for high need student meetings with families Budget - Consultant fees for Artisan teaching work, Per Diem for teacher release time to PD (LDC, Algebra for All, and LINCT for All 6  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. November – School Survey and ELA and Math Regents Baseline Benchmark 1 - This is our baseline data for the year. March/April – Same Measures as above June – Regents Exams - Goal targets met for NYS Regents exams (see above). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) School Benchmarks (Regents and School Survey) in November and March will give global assessment of progress. Smaller frame indicators of academic success will be teacher evaluation data (Danielson performance in Domain 3 and Domain 1) and student grades. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? In September 2015, we began the first year of implementation for the Resilient Scholars Project with the Urban Assembly and Fordham University. The 2018-2019 school year is our fourth year of the project. We have seen significant gains in student behavior, classroom engagement and academic achievement, and family satisfaction. Conversely, teacher survey responses reflect a disconnection between classroom practice and outcomes. For the 2018-2019 school year, there is a strong need to better connect and synthesize processes (teacher planning and lesson execution) with outcomes (student engagement, achievement and family satisfaction) so that teachers feel stronger efficacy in their planning and performance. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school culture and learning environment will more effectively support both the academic and personal growth of students (as increased by a 3% increase in students with over 90% attendance from 67% to 70% and in the increased satisfactory perception of school climate and culture as evidence by an 5% increase in satisfied teacher responses on the Supportive Environment from 78% to 83%. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Supervising Social Worker will conduct periodic classroom observations to provide formative feedback on Positive Classroom Environment Rubric (CLASS). 6th & 9th Grade Teachers Monthly Supervising Social Worker A Lead classroom teachers will support grade team teachers integrate SEL goals into planning and advisors provide students and families with feedback on SEL growth during weekly check-ins and SLCs. Classroom Teachers, All Students and Families Ongoing throughout year Targeted SEL groups (formed using DESSA Data) will meet periodically to target growth areas for students in need. Groups will be reviewed at least once per marking period to evaluate progress Monthly PTA meetings will be aimed at increasing teacher-family communication and to support families to develop strategies to provide academic and social emotional support at home. Three of these meetings will coincide with Monday teacher PD to increase in-person contact between staff and families from 4 to 7 times throughout the year. Counselors Families, all teachers, counselors, advisors Classroom teachers, Lead Teachers, Counselors, and Supervising Social Worker Counselors and Targeted Students (as per DESSA Performance) Ongoing throughout the year Monthly meetings . Meetings in OCT, APR, and DEC will be 3PM-5:30PM to maximize teacher attendance Consultants - e.g Border Crosses (or other TBD by SLT and PTA) to facilitate culturally responsive understanding between adults in UAI community MSQI partnership to support parents & teachers in developing academic strategies to support student learning outside of school time 9  Counselors and Partners to provide outside of school workshops to support SEL development 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. All students are assigned to an advisor (at a ratio of 12-15 students per advisor). At least one time each marking period, advisors convene a meeting to provide an update on student academic and social-emotional progress towards college-readiness goals. The frequency and substance of these meetings are differentiated to student need. Timeline: Advisors meet weekly with advisees (SEP2018 through JUN2019). Each advisee meets at minimum once per marking period with Advisor and Parent (in addition to Student Led Conferences - so 6 meetings plus 2 SLCs per year). Parents will provided direct contact to advisors and parent coordinator to be able to continue communications between check-ins and SLCs. Parent Coordinator will support teacher and parent communication when necessary. Implementation and Oversight: Advisors record outcomes of meetings in Anecdotals on Skedula. Student progress (and thus priority for meeting frequence) are revisited with student data (attendance, grades, schoolwide assessment data) each marking period. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Staffing – Principal, 35 teachers, 5 Social Workers/Guidance Counselors, 3 dean Per Session – PD for SEL team, Per Diem for staff release for Resilient Scholars PLCs 0  Use of Time - Monday and Tuesday Contractual time has been collapsed via SBO for three Mondays in OCT, APR, and DEC to increase face-to-face opportunities for parents and families to build communication and connection OTPS Consultant fees (for organizations like Border Crossers or another TBD organization) to facilitate those teacher-parent meetings Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Class Rubric - November 2018 will be baseline observations on the Positive Climate Rubric. By January 2018, at least 70% (25 of 35 teachers) of classrooms will score a Mid (4,5) or High (6,7) rating on each of the four indicators of this rubric (Relationships, Positive Communications, Positive Affect, and Respect). By June of 2019, at least 90% will score Mid-High in all of these indicators. Advance Rubric - By October 2018, all teachers will receive baseline observations. By January 2019, all Resilient Scholars Teachers (6th & 9th Grade Teachers) will have an average rating of 3 or higher in Domain 2a and an average rating of 2.5 or higher in Domain 2d. By June 2019, Advance Ratings in Domain 2a and 2d will be effective or higher for at least 90% of all classroom teachers. Attendance Team Monitoring - In the course of their regular work (monitoring and improving student attendance), the team will provide monthly reports on average daily attendance to track progress towards goal. By February, 2019, there will be a 5% decrease in chronically absent students, from 40% to 35%. Behavior and Intervention Reporting - Each week our deans generate internal reports on classroom incidents and student disciplinary events. By October 2018, there will be a 2% decrease in classroom removals, relative to October 2017. By January 2019, removals will decrease at least another 5% and by June 2019, total classroom removals will be at least 10% lower than 2017-2018 totals. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Danielson Rubric Indicators, ATS Reports (Attendance), CLASS Rubric, OORS Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths In 2015, we reorganized teacher teams to be based on instructional focus (i.e. teacher who taught the same/similar course) vs. on organizational focus (e.g. grade or subject teams). In 2016-2017, teachers met daily with their planning teams to focus on daily lesson plans and improve instructional practice. Last year, the intensity of focus on lesson planning and lesson execution continued to grow, and as a result, student engagement and academic achievement improved. Needs By focusing so explicitly on their individual skills and classroom practices, teachers did not feel a sense of belonging to the larger mission and vision of the school or how their individual work and efforts connecting the the fulfilment of UAI's mission to graduating young women who are ready and able to successfully complete college or compete in any career of their choosing. The siloed classroom focus was necessary to improve individual teacher skills. Without strong skills, individual contributions to the teams were weak, and thus larger collaborations fell flat. Now, with over 85% of staff returning, the large majority of teachers are ready to look beyond their own classrooms to see how their work connects to other grades and content, and to the larger mission of UAI. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teacher teams will collaboratively analyze student performance (both in formative and summative) to develop and implement targeted supports, as evidenced by a 5% increase in students scoring at or above passing rate on MS summative exams, from 35% to 40% and all Regents exams, from 45% to 50% 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Use of Circ 6 Professional Periods: Principal will identify Lead teachers to pair with new or teachers in need of support (2nd year teachers or teachers in need of support). At UAI, this results in all core content (English, Math, Science, Social Studies, and Language) teachers are participating in Artisan Teaching. Additionally, Artisan teaching will target teacher capacity to support special populations specifically our ELLs and students with disabilities. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teacher Leaders and New(er) Teachers Daily starting in September Principal, Assistant Principal, Lead Teachers and Teachers with 2 or fewer yrs of experience (or otherwise identified as high need) Artisan Model Coaching: Artisan Model author, Ken Baum, will coach principal and assistant principal of instruction on methods to support lead teachers, systems to foster a strong learning environment for teachers, establish expectations for learning (both adult and student), and launch the Artisan Teaching Model Principal and AP of Instruction Weekly in The Fall and TBD in Spring Principal, AP of Instruction, Lead Teachers and their mentees. Monday PD We will use our weekly PD time on Mondays to further the work of the Artisan Teaching Model, specifically looking at teacher assessment of student thinking in both discourse and writing, and in practicing and honing lesson delivery. Teacher Inquiry Pods will focus on planning and execution of lessons, evaluating lesson efficacy through looking at student work, and critiquing and improving unit planning and response to student thinking. All teachers Weekly Principal, AP Instruction, Classroom Teachers Full Staff PDs will be used to provide necessary development around topics and trends that arise throughout the course of our work in the model. Principal, API, teachers as needed Principal, API, teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 3  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. All students are assigned to an advisor (at a ratio of 12-15 students per advisor). At least one time each marking period, advisors convene a meeting to provide an update on student academic and social-emotional progress towards college-readiness goals. The frequency and substance of these meetings are differentiated to student need. Timeline: Advisors meet weekly with advisees (SEP2017 through JUN2018). Each advisee meets at minimum once per marking period with Advisor and Parent (in addition to Student Led Conferences - so 6 meetings plus 2 SLCs per year). Parent Interaction: Parents will have direct contact to teachers via email and text, and a monthly email will articulate class and school activities in which parents can sign up to visit (Family Fridays), chaperone, or otherwise participate. Implementation and Oversight: Advisors record outcomes of meetings in Anecdotals on Skedula. Student progress (and thus priority for meeting frequence) are revisited with student data (attendance, grades, schoolwide assessment data) each marking period. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Staffing and Scheduling – Teachers are given Professional Period via 6R to meet and/or visit classrooms to provide in-class coaching and/or feedback. All core content teachers participate in Artisan Pairs. Per Diem and Per Session for released PD days and after school meetings for lead teacher development Scheduling of Monday and Tuesday PD and Meeting times for PODs and teacher collaboration. Consultant Fees for Working with Artisan Teaching Model Ken Baum to implement model Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 4  Advance Observation Performance. By October 2018, all teachers will receive baseline observations. For teachers with an average rating in Domain 2 or Domain 3 of Ineffective or Developing, by January 2019 for at least 80% of teachers one Domain (depending on the need of the teacher) will improve to an average rating of Effective or better. By June 2019, at least 80% of teachers will have average rating of Effective or Highly Effective in both Domain 2 and Domain 3. Course Pass Rates. November 2018 marks the end of our first marking period and baseline for the year. By January 2019, course pass rates and performance on state exam benchmarks will improve at least 10% from baseline. By March 2019, average course pass rates and performance on state exam benchmarks will improve at least 20% from baseline. By June 2019, overall course pass rates will be at least 10% higher than that of June 2018. In addition, by June 2018– Regents Exams - Goal targets met for NYS Regents exams (see above). Increase in Math and ELA College Ready scores to result in increase to 29% for our CCRI Increase Regents Completion rate by 10% (from 47% to 57%) Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Danielson Rubric, Course Pass Rates (Marking Period Data), and Regents Performance (Benchmarks in November and April will provide interim progress data towards June targets). See above for specific measures. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths The Principal's hands-on approach to instructional planning and leadership provides teachers with immediate feedback and input at the planning phase led to increased confidence and trust in school leadership (98% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that the principal encourages feedback through regular meetings with parents and teacher leaders and 90% of teachers agree that the principal understands how children learn.) Needs To build on this work, our goal is to leverage our strengths in Effective School Leadership to achieve our goals in Rigorous Instruction and successfully improve the instructional rigor and student intellectual engagement in classrooms. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the principal will create and implement an impactful professional development plan as evidenced by a 5% increase in teachers' Effective ADVANCE ratings in Domain 1 (Planning for Instruction) and Domain 3 (Instruction), from 75% to 80% and from 67% to 72%. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Principal Mentoring - Principal will work with Ken Baum, consultant and former principal of the Urban Assembly School of Applied Math & Science to develop leadership and implement Artisan Teaching Model. Principal Artisan Teaching Model - Principal and AP of Instruction will work directly with coaching pairs to improve instruction, planning, and lesson execution Principal, AP, and teachers Principal Coaching: Principal will meet and shadow three instructional leaders (the Artisan Leader Model, if you will) to support their development and capacity to effectively lead the school in (1) Instruction, (2) Operations, and (3) Student Affairs (Activities and Discipline) Principal, APO, API, and Lead Social Worker 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Weekly in the Fall and TBD in the Spring Weekly with Pairs and as Needed throughout year Weekly and as Needed (and after school) Principal Principal, AP, teachers Principal, APO, API, and Lead Social Worker How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. This goal focuses primarily on in-school practices, however, parents will continue to be apprised of school progress and student achievement through weekly Advisor check-ins and meetings (see Family Engagement above) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Staffing: Consultant Fees for Ken Baum, Principal, AP, teachers Per Diem and Per Session: For Teachers to engage in out-of-school and after-school professional development Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 7  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, results of work led by principal, assistant principal, and lead teachers will result in a [TBD]% increase in teacher performance in Danielson Domain 3d (assessment), [TBD]% with correlative growth in Danielson Domain 3a and 3b [TBD on specific percentages] By June 2019 school leaders will build teachers' capacity to develop and execute intellectually engaging tasks and activities, as evidenced by a 11% increase n teacher performance in Danielson Framework for Teaching, component 3c (Student Engagement) and 3d (Assessment) and move from 59% effective to 70% effective. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance Ratings and the Danielson rubric will be the specific instrument used to track progress. By October 2018, all staff will have baseline observations and in-person meetings to discuss current progress towards 3D, 3B and 3C goals. By January 2019, mid-year conferences will be completed (and at least 50% of observations) to provide teachers with feedback on progress towards goals. By June 2019, we will reach our targets in Domain 3 Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths For the third year in a row, we have improved our performance in Strong Family Ties. 90% of our families agree that they are involved in regularly scheduled meetings with teachers regarding their child's progress (either in scheduled parent-conference dates or throughout the year), and 100% of our teachers reported that they regularly communicate with parents and families about student progress. The basis of our growth lies in the efficacy of our school-to-home communications. Needs To continue to refine this work, we are leveraging our restructured Advisory and Family Engagement time to provide a streamlined system of communication for teacher and parents when discussing students progress and areas of growth. In concert with our Student-Led-Conferences and our goals around college-readiness, we aim to enrich our partnership with parents and invest their support in helping us push their children towards long-standing academic and social-emotional achievement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will deepen our home-school partnership, as evidenced by a 15% increase in family participation in educational planning meetings and conferences, as well as online and phone reciprocal communication, from 65% to 75%. In addition, we will see stronger family-school relationships as evidenced by a 2% growth in overall average daily attendance (ADA) from 88% to 90% with a specific increase of students have over 90% ADA move from 40% to 45%. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Create and schedule parent social events and set parent attendance targets for each event. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? PTA, families, Parent Coordinator Sept- For Calendar Ongoing for Targets PTA, PTA President, Parent Coordinator, Student Affairs Director, Principal Advisory Family Engagement calls will happen weekly with each students receiving updates minimally once a marking period (more for students in need). Teachers weekly classroom teachers, familes Continue monthly newsletter for families Parents Ongoing Meet three times with full staff and PTA to participate in facilitate workshop by Border Crossers (or someone from the office of Equity) to build higher-quality communication between staff and families to better support student achievement Parents October Teachers April School Leadership December Principal, PTA President, Parent Coordinator Principal, PTA President, Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. All students are assigned to an advisor (at a ratio of 12-15 students per advisor). At least one time each marking period, advisors convene a meeting to provide an update on student academic and social-emotional progress towards college-readiness goals. The frequency and substance of these meetings are differentiated to student need. Timeline: Advisors meet weekly with advisees (SEP2017 through JUN2018). Each advisee meets at minimum once per marking period with Advisor and Parent (in addition to Student Led Conferences - so 6 meetings plus 2 SLCs per year). 0  Implementation and Oversight: Advisors record outcomes of meetings in Anecdotals on Skedula. Student progress (and thus priority for meeting frequence) are revisited with student data (attendance, grades, schoolwide assessment data) each marking period. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Staffing – Parent Coordinator, Principals, Teachers, Lead Social Worker (Director of Student Affairs) Other – PTA President, Volunteer Parents, and Partner Staff Per Session for Teachers: To plan and run activities for parents (e.g. Math & Science Nights) OTPS: Supplies to support teacher run workshops PTA will fund food and refreshments Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. LES will be self-administered three times a year (November, January, and June). November will provide baseline data for Strong Family ties. By January 2019, overall satisfaction in this area will improve to 85% and buy June we will reach our goal of 90% overall satisfaction. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Learning Environment Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) DRP is in lowest thirdand/or is NYSEDELAPL 1 or 2 Mathematics Science Social Studies Middle or Elementary School Math is Level 2 or lower for grades 6-9 OR CC Algebra Reg is below 65 for grade 10/11/12 DRP is in lowest third And/or Middle/Elementary School Math is Level 2 or lower for grades 6-9. OR Algebra is below 65 for grade 10/11/12 or has not yet passed science Regent DRP is in lowest third At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) DESSA composite score indicated High Need Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Double Collaborative Reasoning Groups, Double Individual Conferences, lunch tutoring and after school tutoring Double Collaborative Reasoning Groups, Double Individual Conferences, lunch tutoring and after schooltutoring Double Collaborative Reasoning Groups, Double Individual Conferences, lunch tutoring and after schooltutoring Double Collaborative Reasoning Groups, Double Individual Conferences, lunch tutoring and after schooltutoring Small Group and/or IndividualCounseling (akaPower Group). Behavior Intervention Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small Group and one-to-one after school tutoring During Class, during Lunch and After School ool tutoring Small Group and one-to-one after school tutoring During Class, during Lunch and After School tutoring Small Group and one-to-one after school tutoring During Class, during Lunch and After School tutoring Small Group and one-to-one and after school tutoring During Class, during Lunch and After School tutoring Small Group and one-to-one pulled from Class During Class, during Lunch and After School 2  Meetings with teachers and parents 3  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) About 13 (3 that are official - actually at a shelter...roughly 10 that are staying with family or friends) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Through our partnership with Girls Inc., we provide families with community assistance (support in navigating city agencies and requesting support). Additionally, our team of social workers and counselors provide family and individual counseling (or refer for adult family members). Finally, all students in temporary housing receive school supplies, hygiene products, and other items (e.g. clothes, coats) as needed from school and partner funds. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). Not Applicable - We're a Title I School 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 4  Not Applicable - We're a Title I School 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. Not Applicable - We're a Title I School 5  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Teacher-Based Hiring Committee selected highly qualified resumes from pool of new teachers and open market. Team interviews candidates and selects highest qualified individual with strongest interview. Principal meets with candidate to verify quality and approve teacher-committee hires. Through the Artisan Teaching Model, principal and lead teachers work with incoming staff to improve pedagogy and practice that result in high quality teaching. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Artisan Teaching (see above) and a new partnership with Generation Ready & the Literacy Design Collaborative are our two main tools that we use to provide professional development for teachers that enable them to align to standards. Coaches meet regularly with paired teachers and facilitate Monday PD Pods (teacher led PLCs that include theory-based classroom inter-visitation). Coaches are trained to effectively communicate and motivate paired peers to set and reach pedagogical goals in line with whole-school goals. Coaches are also well versed in course standards, including math & ELA CCSS. Coaches meet daily with mentee to ensure that unit planning and lesson planning successfully integrate CCSS alongside other content area goals (e.g. science and social studies) Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Not Applicable - we are a Schoolwide Title I School 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 6  Not Applicable - we are a Schoolwide Title I School Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Not Applicable - We are a secondary school 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers have full decision power over class assessments. Teacher leaders and coaches work collaboratively with Principal and AP of Instruction to select interim (we call them benchmark) assessments. This year the school is using NYS mock Regents to measure progress towards high school assessments and we are using the released questions to create mock tests for the middle school. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E, 6, 7, 8 Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal 323,482 0 0 x 7  Title III, Immigrant Federal 0 Tax Levy (FSF) Local 3,078,619 x 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E, 6, 7, 8 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs. 8   Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 9  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The Urban Assembly Institute of Math and Science for Young Women is in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). UAI is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students UA Institute will support parents and families of Title I students by:  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; 0  The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed;   1  conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) UA Institute, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 1. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;  using academic learning time efficiently;    offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by:     conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;   providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; 3  arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents    creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games;     promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;   participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;   become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to  learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; 4   share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; 3. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities      attend school regularly and arrive on time; complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; show respect for myself, other people and property; try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; always try my best to learn 5  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 6  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: These services will be used to provide direct and basic English learning instruction for our ELLs. After school instruction will be focused primarily on English learning instruction for our newly arrived immigrants. This instruction will occur Wednesdays and Thursdays from 3:00-5:00 in the ELL teacher, Ms. Rebecca Fitle's room. These students are struggling in school and need more time than allotted in the classroom. Additionally, basic instructional services (tutorials) will be provided for our Transitioning level students who are struggling with higher level academic work inside the classroom. These sessions will be open for grades 6-12, with a focus on high school. Additionally, in-class instruction will be supplemented with electronic materials and coursework. Materials will be purchased through the Middlebury Curriculum. This curriculum was used last year, and will continue to be used this year as well. Furthermore, online English learning materials (through instructional providers like "Really Learn English") will be purchased for the Entering and Emerging level students. Furthermore, content teachers in History, ELA and Science will be given per session on an ad-hoc basis to assist with the same group of students. These teachers will include: High school science teacher (Mr. Damon Noland or Ms. Meghan Goodwin ), High school history teacher (Ms. Kelly Preston) and high school English teacher (Ms. Cassandra Guerrier). These teachers will be assigned ELL students who are struggling in their classes to tutor after school. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Our ELL teacher will be a member of the Affinity Group ELL Leadership Series. She attends periodic PD trainings held by the Affinity Group. These trainings occur throughout the 2018-19 school year (about every 6 weeks.) Topics of this PD series include: compliance with CR Part 154, improving instruction for ELLs throughout the content areas, literacy enrichment, scaffolding and differentiation, and family engagement. The ELL teacher will also take part in programmed weekly co-planning periods totalling in duration of over 50 min per week. 7  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: In addition to the ELL parent letters and parent orientation meetings, our school is very active in ensuring parent engagement. Every student is assigned an adviser, whose job is to maintain frequent communication with the parents. Every Tuesday, advisers hold meetings with our parents to discuss their child's progress, and provide them with any necessary school wide information. During this time, advisers can inform ELL parents of these supplementary activities. Additionally, our ELL teacher, Ms. Rebecca Fitle, maintains a strong relationship with our immigrant parents. She will sent home letters (in various language- translated by the Language and Interpretation Unit) and make phone calls home as well (using the LIU for over the phone translation, if necessary.) English learning materials purchased through this grant (see Part A) will be offered to the parents of ELLs as well. Parents will be encouraged to come in after school to meet with Ms. Michelle Babick to receive these materials, and receive instruction as well with how to use the materials. Parents will also be instructed on how to use English learning applications through their phones or electronic devices. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental. Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 8  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 9  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 13 School Name Urban Assembly Institute of Math and Sci Borough Brooklyn School Number 527 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Kiri Soares Coach not applicable ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Michelle Babick (primary ELL t Teacher/Subject Area not applicable Teacher/Subject Area not applicable Related-Service Provider not applicable Superintendent not applicable Assistant Principal Valeria Binyard Coach not applicable School Counselor Jennifer Jackson Robbins Parent Nequan Mclean Parent Coordinator Carol Jones Field Support Center Staff Member not applicable Other (Name and Title) n/a C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 4 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 498 0 Total number of ELLs 54 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 10.84%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 K 0 Lang. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 3 0 4 0 2 0 5 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school uses an effective integration of both informal and formal assessments. The school uses teacher created assessments as well as the Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) assessment, a nationally normed reading test. Looking at the data from the Spring DRP scores, a majority of our ENLs ranked in the “below grade level” or “significantly below grade level” categories. Additionally, for the middle school students, prior Common Core Exam scores are used to measure their proficiency in ELA and Math. Another formal assessment that guides teacher practice is benchmark testing on state exams. Benchmarks are administered 4 times a year. They are mocked to the Regents and MS ELA/Math state testing. They are scored and analyzed for student growth in their content area. Teacher uses this data to share with students and to design his or her curriculum. Additionally, this year, one of our pedagogical goals as a school has been to increase the use of consistent and informal formative assessment in the classroom. One-on-one student-teacher conferences are a key form of assessment that help teachers guide their instruction with our ENLs. Additionally, our pull-out and push in ENL program offers small group 1  instruction that is targeted to the needs of our ENLs. Our licensed ENL teacher works with the content teachers to create a curriculum that is targeted at developing their literacy and language skills in the areas of need. Additionally, daily assessments such as visual checks for understanding, student self assessment tasks, and peer and/or teacher discussions about content provide data on student performance. Teachers adjust the lessons for the following day based on the data provided from their assessment in instruction. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Our school schedules benchmark testing 4 times a year to offer a formal measure of growth across all content areas. The results are put into a shared document for the entire staff to review. The results are used to reflect on pedagogical practices and adjust instructional strategies. Each teacher is responsible for creating his or her benchmark exam. Additionally, DRP tests are administered by our testing coordinator. The testing coordinator ensures that every student has access to a digital version of the exam. Teachers receive intervisitation and coaching from administrators and content teachers. They share their observations and provide feedback for teachers to grow their professional skills. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Benchmark assessments are given every November, January, March and May to identify progress in each class. These assessments for the school mirror state examinations from grade 6-12. By May or June, these assessments are used as predictives to measure the likelihood of student passing rates. Additionally, across all content areas, each unit is assessed using a summative task as well as mini tasks throughout. Depending on the content area, this can take various forms. It could be an essay /written piece, a class project or presentation, or a final exam that covers the topics for that particular unit. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Information is shared out ot staff to discuss student target areas. The school offers both small-group in class intervention by content teachers as well as pull-out ENL intervention. Inside the classroom, learning groups are formed based on performance data. These small groups help to increase student comprehension on concepts they have struggled with in the summative assessments. Additionally, Michelle Babick, the ENL teacher, works closely with the content teachers to offer targeted group work in ELA, Science and History in areas of growth. Also, after school test prep is offered to provide additional help to increase their content skills. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Informal assessments in the classroom to guide daily instruction at the Tier 1 level. In addition, data is used to increase the frequency and intensity of interventions in Tiers 2 and 3. At the Tier 2 level, students receive extra targeted instruction in the form of additional one-on-one and group conferences and reading groups in every class. More so, students are then targeted for additional support as data indicates using our lunch tutoring program. Finally, at the Tier 3 level more intensive instruction can be offered both in the lunch tutoring program as well as through targeted small instruction groups using research and evidence-based interventions. Furthermore, we use a peer coaching program to increase teacher practices to become masters at assessing student knowledge through informal, formal class assessment, and lesson design. Our goal is to increase teacher support to increase student based learning and self-assessment. Teachers meet one-on-one with each student at least once per marking period (for the lowest third, teachers meet with students at least twice a marking period) to set goals and determine which differentiated activities and assessments best meet student needs. Goals are derived from informal and formal assessments including coursework, DRP scores, and Regents exams. We also form learning groups on a regular basis which entails a group of 4-5 students lead by the teacher. Learning groups are selected based on performance on coursework and exams. During Independent Work Time, students must select from a range of leveled activities that correspond to the topics of each unit. In addition, in our middle school, students who struggle the most are pulled out from class to receive extra support. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. 2  The NYSESLAT and the NYSITELL are used to program each ENL student for her required number of minutes. Entering students will receive a total of 360 minutes a week (with 1 unit of stand alone and 1 unit of integrated). Emerging students receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction (with 0.5 unites standalone and 0.5 units of flexibility and 1 unit of integrated). Transitioning students will receive 180 minutes a week with 0.5 units of integrated and 0.5 units of flexibility. Expanding students will receive 180 minutes of instruction with 1 unit of integrated ENl instruction. Finally, former ELLs will continue to receive services for 2 years, with 0.5 units of flexibility. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The ENL teacher works closely with the Pupil Secretary, Nancy Johanson, to carefully review the RLAT in ATS. The ENL teacher, Ms. Michelle Babick, then works with the AP, Val Binyard, to make programming decisions based on these findings. After the NYSISTELL is administered and the test results are complete, the ENL program is set after the first 10 days of instruction. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. We have an ENL program with both push-in and pull-out support. The ENL teacher, Michelle Babick, works with each group of students by grade. She does a combination of push in and pull out according to the requirements of CR Part 154. Additionally, the other licensed ENL teacher, Ms. Suzannah Tartin also has a history license. She will be working with the 10th graders now and will offer them 2 units of integrated ENL instruction every week. b. TBE program. If applicable. not applicable c. DL program. If applicable. not applicable 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The NYSESLAT and the NYSITELL are used to program each ENL student for her required number of minutes. Entering students will receive a total of 360 minutes a week (with 1 unit of stand alone and 1 unit of integrated). Emerging students receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction (with 0.5 unites standalone and 0.5 units of flexibility and 1 unit of integrated). Transitioning students will receive 180 minutes a week with 0.5 units of integrated and 0.5 units of flexibility. Expanding students will receive 180 minutes of instruction with 1 unit of integrated ENl instruction. Finally, former ELLs will continue to receive services for 2 years, with 0.5 units of flexibility. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our ENL free-standing program delivers scaffolded and differentiated content through small group learning. If the ENL teacher is inside the classroom, appropriate scaffolding and differentiated strategies are used to ensure that every student has access to the core content. Additionally, small group learning and one-on-one conferences offer interventions for students who are struggling with the content. The push-in and pull-out teacher works very closely with the content teachers to plan small-group activities and lessons in line with the content being taught in each core class. In the middle school, the ENL teacher works most 3  closely with the ELA team in planning and differentiating lessons for the ENL students in middle school. In high school, the ENL teacher works across the content areas in history, ELA, and science. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? A child’s second language development is considered in instructional decisions through a multitude of pathways. Children with the same home language are encouraged to interact and work collaboratively in the classroom. In addition, when applicable, students who can produce assignments in their home language are given the option when appropriate to respond in their home language. In addition, for students for whom it is applicable, bilingual dictionaries and glossaries are provided as well access to Google translate and advisers who speak the home language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Instruction is differentiated for each subgroup based on initial diagnostic testing and additional diagnostic testing completed during each unit of study by content area teachers. In addition, differentiation is based on Degrees of Reading Power assessment scores. This assessment occurs three times per academic year. Further differentiation occurs within as well as as a result of group and individual student teacher conferences. These conferences guide individualized student goals and academic action plans. Plan for Newcomers When a new student is registered in our school, we provide the following resources to facilitate the transition. • An informal student orientation • Buddy system identifying a similar student in his/her class that will assist during the day • Encourage student to participate in the Saturday Program and After School activities. • An informal assessment is provided to identify possible Academic Intervention programs. • Home school communication Plan for Developing ELLs: Students will continue to receive freelance ENL push-in and pull out services Students will receive indirect services through co-planning and differentiated materials and tasks Students will receive direct services through pull-out instruction and additional conferences and learning groups Students will be encouraged to receive additional support through lunch-time tutoring and after school academic support programs Plan for SIFE When a student enrolls who is SIFE there will be an urgency to provide academic intervention services as an extension of the regular school program on both push in and pull out services. • Making an individualized student needs assessment • Creation of an AIS plan for the student focus on the literacy and math component • Grade appropriate instructional support materials • Differentiation of instruction in all areas • Staff will receive professional development in the identification of SIFE students; and in strategies that benefit the SIFE students within classroom instruction. Plan for Long Term ELLs 4  Students will receive indirect services through co-planning and differentiated materials and tasks Students will receive direct services through pull-out instruction and additional conferences and learning groups Students will be encouraged to receive additional support through lunch-time tutoring and after school academic support programs As our ELL population grows we will increase the following programs and opportunities: • An after school program, targeting reading and writing three days during the week. • Monitoring the progress of students in all content areas to differentiate instruction for literacy needs • Encourage their participation in Study Island, Plato, and other online resources that levels students skills. Plan for Special Needs Students As our ELL Special Needs population has grown to two students, we have been: • Ensuring that teachers of students with an IEP are familiar with students’ particular needs and all services are provided accordingly to the IEP mandates. • Ensuring Collaboration between the ESL teacher and IEP contact person. • Monitoring newcomer and SIFE students for possible special needs status. Plan for Former ELLs: The ninth grader, eleventh, and eighth grader receive two periods of ESL support a week They also receive extended time on all local and NYS assessments 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers are coached by content teachers, Administration, ENL and IEP teacher to help guide their lessons and curriculum through differentiation. Students receive the opportunity to explore an array of content resources which provides multiple entry points to access the curriculum. In particular, teachers use structured Turn and Talks to support ELLs in using basic interpersonal communication skills (typically more advanced) to support cognitive academic language processing - or academic skills and understanding in the target language. Additionally, teachers employ "sheltered" instruction (e.g. low-literacy demand texts with images and genre features to promote understanding) to support content acquisition. Furthermore, the ELL teacher co-plans and collaborates with the content teachers (primarily ELA, History, and Science) to modify lesson plans, assessments, and course readings. Often times, the ELL teachers will be sure to highlight and define key academic vocabulary essential to understanding the reading. Levelled texts for history and science (with heavily reliance on visual aids) are given to students at lower reading levels. The assessments can be modified with reworded prompts, essay outlines and sentence starters, word and vocabulary boxes for written exams, and vocabulary rich study guides. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Students are first programmed to receive supports through their IEP mandate. The ENL and IEP teacher meet to review the IEP goals and develop a plan that addresses both needs. This plan is shared with the students content teacher to allow target goals for the students to reach every six weeks. In addition to their IEP mandates students will also receive push in or pull out services for ENL, depending on the need for the student. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted interventions for ELA and math include our ENL pull-out and push-in program that focuses on small group learning. The ENL teacher intervenes according to the content area that the student is struggling with. Additionally, inside the classroom 5  we offer collaborative reasoning groups to increase comprehension of rigorous topics. Implications for LAP in English Language Arts Area In order to assist our ELL students in ELA achievement, our Humanities teachers have been using ELL scaffolding techniques class. The results, according to NYSELAT data have shown growth. Teachers have been making sure that our ELL students have more access to materials through using the following strategies: • Collaboration between content area teachers to create a learning community which is knowledgeable and experienced in researched based Instructional Strategies • Provide opportunities for students to be involved in purposeful conversations • Incorporating all language modalities during the lesson, e.g. group discussions, journals, student verbal and written responses • Ensure that teachers analyze student’s data to identify strength and weakness and utilize the findings to drive and differentiated instruction through professional development. • Ensure that the AP works closely with the Humanities teachers to support rigorous instruction. • Implement a print rich environment; we will buy ESL dictionaries and Glossaries in the Humanities classrooms. • In the future we will analyze ELLs data to become well-informed about the performance of each ELL in order to make sounded educational decisions. • Encourage teachers to participate on professional development opportunities focusing in instructional strategies for ELLs; such as, Quality Teaching for English Learners and Community Support Learning Organization. Implications for LAP in Mathematics Content Area Teachers make sure that our ELL students have more access to materials through using the following strategies: • Provide opportunities for students to negotiate with mathematics academic language, e.g. reading and solving word problems, interactive word wall, providing written and verbal explanations • Incorporating writing as a component of the mathematics lesson, e.g. journals • Provide opportunities to convey to others problem solving strategies and the justification of their answer • Ensure the identification and analysis of student strength and weakness to drive and differentiated instruction • Encourage Math teachers to participate on professional development opportunities focusing on ELL instructional needs; such as, Quality Teaching for English Learners and Community Learning Support Organization. • In the future we will analyze ELLs data to become well-informed about the performance of each ELL in order to make sounded educational decisions • In the future we will hire an additional fully licensed ESL instructor. Implications for LAP in other content areas: • Collaboration between content area teachers to create a learning community which is knowledgeable and experienced in researched based Instructional Strategies • Provide opportunities for students to be involved in purposeful conversations • Incorporating all language modalities during the lesson, e.g. group discussions, journals, student verbal and written responses • Ensure that teachers analyze student’s data to identify strength and weakness and utilize the findings to drive and differentiated instruction through professional development. • In the future we will analyze ELLs data to become well-informed about the performance of each ELL in order to make sounded educational decisions. • Encourage teachers to participate on professional development opportunities focusing in instructional strategies for ELLs; such as, Quality Teaching for English Learners and Community Support Learning Organization. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? 6  In the upcoming school year, all content area teachers will require students to use the speaking and writing modalities to express content area knowledge at least once per inquiry unit in addition to offer increased scaffolding as a result of unit specific diagnostic testing. More so, the ESL teacher will work closely with the APs to develop and deliver targeted professional development in the area of research-based instructional strategies. Finally, an additional teacher will obtain an ESL license and begin working with the ELL population to offer more push-in services. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Our school does not have a bilingual program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are included in every school activity and program including our after school programming as well as our lunch tutoring program. We offer a range of after school and during school programs to enrich their academic and social development. We are in partnership with Girls Inc which offers a variety of programs: After school and lunch period tutoring and academic support Social and academic clubs including: Debate Guitar club Theater Making Club Dance Club Project Occupy (social awareness) Photography Club We also offer after school sports including cross country track, volleyball and basketball. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Students explore multiple instructional videos and access websites to learn how to navigate and access resource links to support their content knowledge. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The school often meet with parents to discuss their progress in the ENL program. The ENL teachers shares with the parent how they can support their child at home. The ENL teacher uses each child’s home language as a scaffold for delivering content. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. After the first 10 days of testing, the ENL teacher reviews the RLAT to determine the amount of required minutes for each student in the program. Then, a program is created that groups students by grade level, differentiating the amount of minutes based on the NYSESLAT scores. In a couple cases, some grade levels are combined for continuity purposes. The 7-8th graders follow a similar ELA and civics curriculum, so they meet during the same block to receive ENL instruction in ELA and civics. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The ENL teacher often attends professional development to grow in her professional knowledge. The teacher also attends the school professional development to help provide support in the school goals in integrating socioemotional learning to promote an increase in academic and linguistic skills. The school introduces the ENL students to our counselors to provide 1:1 support if 7  needed. The school goal is to also increase students socioemotional skills like self awareness, social awareness, self management, and decision making within the student's classroom to support continuous skill development. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). The school has a Night of the Stars event that welcomes all students. The Assistant Principal and Counsleor hold an acitivity for the students to meet teachers and students in small groups. Through several interactive activities students meet and greet former and new students. Students are also broken up into smaller groups to have Q and A session about the school. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Currently, we offer Spanish as an elective for all students, including our ELLs. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? The school currently does not have a dual language program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The ENL teacher attends all mandated school professional development to stay abreast on the school’s academic goal for students and teachers. The ENL teacher is also encouraged to attend ENL professional development workshop provided by the school’s affinity group. This year, the ENL teacher is a part of the Affinity Group's ELL Leadership Series. This professional development community meets throughout the year (around every t weeks) to cover key concepts around ELL education. These concepts include: CR Part 154, Literacy enrichment, scaffolding, differentiation, and parent engagement/translation resources. Additionally, the ELL teacher attends any professional development she teacher pertinent to students' needs. Monthly (or sooner depending on the timing of PD workshops), Monday PD time is allocated to provide the ENL teacher time to turnkey PD learnings. Non-pedagogical staff attend frequent trainings related to compliance efforts around ELLs. The Assistant Principal of Operations, Mr. Brodie Crawford, has attended an ATS training [for ELL entry and identification], an ELL monitoring and compliance training, and plans to attend further trainings regarding ELL compliance hosted by the Affinity Group. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Workshops that pertain to ENL teacher is shared with the ENL teacher to encourage sign up and attend workshops. ENL teachers bring back agendas to our school secretary to retain as proof of attendance. Additionally, our ENL teacher is a part of the Affinity Group’s ELL Leadership Series. This professional development group meets a few times a year to co-plan, discuss effective ENL pedagogy, and work on CR part 154 programming requirements. 8  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The ENL teacher works to maintain consistent outreach with the parents of our ELLs. In the beginning of the year, the ENL teacher sends a letter introducing herself with her email and contact information to each parent. Additionally, she calls each parent to inform them on the details of her child’s ENL program schedule. Throughout the year, there are three parent-teacher conference nights. During that time, the ENL teacher meets with the teachers to discuss their child’s progress and language development. Furthermore, the ENL teacher calls home periodically throughout the year to discuss each child’s progress, and what supports could be helpful at home. The Language and Interpretation Unit is used frequently to call ENL parents, or to translate documents to be sent home. For example, notifications of parent-teacher nights and the ENL program schedule are translated and sent home. Additionally, the ENL teacher using the Translation and Interpretation Unit to call and speak with parents who do not speak English. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The school has used several parent activities to increase the ELL parent involvement, father and daughter day, Mother Spa day, progressive dinner, and PTA dinner. In each activity the parents come together to build communal relationships and learn more about the school. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Not applicable at this time 9 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Kiri Soares, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 0  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Urban Assembly Institute of Ma School DBN: 13K527 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Kiri Soares Val Binyard Carol Jones Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Michelle Babick ENL/Bilingual Teacher Nequan Mclean Parent not applicable Teacher/Subject Area n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member n/a Other n/a Other n/a Other n/a Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/21/2017 06/21/2017 06/21/2017 06/21/2017 06/21/2017 06/21/2017 06/21/2017 06/21/2017 06/21/17 06/21/2017 06/21/2017 06/21/2017 06/21/17 06/21/17 06/21/17 1 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: UA Institute Superintendent: Fred Walsh DBN: 13K527 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this Babick LAC Coordinator Yes Yes conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) Michelle * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We use information from the HLIS, ATS, Student Blue Cards, and preferences indicated on internal surveys and sign in sheets at parent activities. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Estonian Chinese Bengali Arabic Haitian/Creole French Fulani Spanish Nepali English Urdu Ukranian 1 8 24 46 4 5 0 42 0 571 6 1 0.14 1.13 3.8 6.48 0.56 0.7 0 5.92 0 80.42 0.85 0.14 1 7 33 48 5 4 1 43 1 555 7 1 0.14 0.99 4.6 6.7 0.71 0.56 0.14 6.06 0.14 78 0.99 0.14 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Monthly newsletters Every month ELL family notifications September Notification of Family Curriculum Night October Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Letters are sent to the Language and Interpretation Unit two weeks before they are planned to be distributed. Translated copies are used from the Employee Intranet service Translated copies are sent to the Translation and Interpretation Unit. Request is made by ELL teacher, Ms, Michelle Babick. In addition, Ms. Babick has instructed the school on 3  Admissions Packet (Emergency Contact Form, Blue Card, Lunch form) September how to use the language line through the Translation unit. Teachers were told to use the language line to communicate with families in order to notify them of curriculum night. For languages that are not covered, our school will use our Translation and Interpretation funds (we are entitled to about for a contracted interpreter. Documents are requested to be translated 1 month before the start of school by the LAC. Request is sent to the language and interpretation unit. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings Curriculum night October How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Translated copies are sent to the Translation and Interpretation Unit. Request is made by ELL teacher, Ms, Michelle Babick. In addition, Ms. Babick has instructed the school on how to use the language line through the Translation unit. Teachers were told to use the language line to 4  Advisory meetings (Parent teacher meetings) Occurring throughout the year communicate with families in order to notify them of curriculum night For languages not covered, we will use our Translation and Interpretation funds for in person translation. Every student is assigned an teacher adviser, whose responsibility is to maintain frequent contact with parents. Ms. Michelle Babick has already instructed the school to use the language line. The language line should be used for calling parents for frequent student updates, and scheduling appointments 5  Additionally, when the parents come into the school, the LAC has the Language Identification "I Speak" cards available for the parents to use in order to identify the language spoken. If they need a translator during the meeting, teachers are instructed to use the language line to translate. If in person translation is necessary, we will use our Translation and Interpretation funds (from which we received about $3000). 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. The fastest way to reach a limited-English proficient family is by calling the Language and Interpretation Unit to get an on-the-phone translator. This phone number, as well as the steps to use a translator, have been shared with the staff so everyone has access to this option. 6  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance.  Our school has scheduled Professional Development meetings alongside monthly Grade Team meetings. The ESL teacher will work within that time frame to offer training on how to use the NYC’s phone services. The ESL teacher will provide information on how to use the phone service, along the phone number, and how to access additional on-site translation services. For the next meeting, scheduled November 6th, the LAC is handing out a one-pager with reminders on how to access the tool kit (located in the main office), how to use the language line, and how to request translated documents. If necessary, the ESL teacher will use time during Grade Team meetings to offer additional training and assistance on using these translation services   All teachers will receive a copy of the “I Speak” card which provides the services and phone numbers listed for the Translation Unit. In addition, teachers are notified that the Language Tool Kit lives in the front office by the Language Identification Poster. In addition, the high school ENL teacher is attending a workshop series entitled “Meeting the Needs of All Learners.” She is scheduled to turn key the information to the general education teachers on a regular basis. Furthermore, the ENL teacher is a member of the ELL Leadership Series, and is attending PD with the Affinity Group on compliance related ELL issues.   Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We have poster displays, direct parent outreach (via our Advisers and Parent Coordinator), and the Language Tool Kit. The Language Identification Poster lives in the front office in front of the pupil secretary's desk. The Language Took Kit is right next to the language identification poster. Every teacher has been notified of the location of the language tool kit and given the language identification brochure. In addition, the teachers are being trained on November 6th on how to use the Language and Interpretation Unit's resources for translating written documents with the school. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 7  Parent Surveys (gathered at SLCs, PTA meetings, and other school events like Winterfest and Springfest). These surveys will be sent to the Translation and Interpretation Unit at least 3 weeks prior to each event. These surveys will be translated and given to the parents. 8 
